THE MARQUIS DE SADE  
The 120 Days 
of Sodom  
and other writings  
compiled and translated by  
Austryn Wainhouse &  
Richard Seaver  
with introductions by  
Simone De Beauvoir &  
Pierre Klossowski  
Grove Press, Inc., New York  Copyright © 1966 by Austryn Wainhouse and Richard Seaver  
“Must We Burn Sade?” by Simone de Beauvoir copyright © 1955 by 
Éditions Gallimard,  Paris, France; translation copyright © 1953 by 
Grove Press, New York. “Nature as Destructive Principle,” by Pierre 
Klossowski copyright © 1964 by Au Cercle du Livre Précieux,  translation 
copyright © 1965 by Yale French Studies.  
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means, or the facilitation thereof, 
including information storage and retrieval systems, without permission 
in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review. Any members of educational institutions wishing to 
photocopy part or all of the work for classroom use, or publishers who 
would like to obtain permission to include the work in an anthology, should send their inquiries to Grove/Atlantic, Inc., 841 Broadway, New 
York, NY 10003.  
Grove Press  
an imprint of Grove/Atlantic, Inc.  
841 Broadway  
New York, NY 10003 
Distributed by Publishers Group West  
www.groveatlantic.com  A
cknowledgments  
The essay by Simone de Beauvoir “Must We Burn Sade?” was originally 
published in the December 1951 and January 1952 issues of Les Temps 
Modernes  as “Faut -il brûler Sade?” and was subsequently reprinted in th e 
collection of the author’s essays entitled Privilèges . The English 
translation first appeared in The Marquis de Sade,  published by Grove 
Press in 1954, and is here reprinted in a slightly revised translation by 
permission of the publisher and the transla tor. “Nature as Destructive 
Principle,” by Pierre Klossowski, served as an introduction to the Au 
Cercle du Livre Précieux  edition of Les 120 Journées de Sodome.  This essay 
is a slightly revised and condensed version of the chapter entitled 
“Esquisse du Système” from the author’s book, Sade mon prochain,  
published by É ditions du Seuil,  Paris, France, 1947. It is here reprinted 
by permission of the author and of the editor of Yale French Studies.  The 
editors wish especially to thank Miss Marilynn Meeker for her 
meticulous job of editing, and for the number and diversity of her 
suggestions.  T
o the memory of Maurice Heine, who freed 
Sade from the prison wherein he was held captive 
for over a century after his death, and to Gilbert 
Lely, who has unselfishly devoted himself to this 
same task of liberation and restitution.  Contents  
Acknowledgments
Foreword
Part One: Critical
Must We Burn Sade? by Simone de Beauvoir
Nature as Destructive Principle by Pierre Klossowski  
Part Two: from Les Crimes de l'Amour
Reflections on the Novel (1800)
Villeterque’s Review of Les Crimes de l’Amour (1800)
The Author of Les Crimes de l’Amour To Villeterque, Hack 
Writer (1803)
Florville and Courval, or The Works of Fate (1788)  
Part Three: The 120 Days of Sodom (1785)
Introduction
Part the First
Part the Second
Part the Third
Part the Fourth  
 
Part Four: Theater
Oxtiern, or The Misfortunes of Libertinage (1800)
Ernestine, A Swedish Tale (1788)
Bibliography 
Foreword  
There is an opinion worth pondering, which may perhaps become the 
prevailing one among Sade’s more thoughtful re aders: according to it, 
the immense fragment occupying the better part of the present volume 
deserves to be considered his crowning achievement, his masterpiece. 
Certainly, behind that estimate lie “special” criteria. Perverse criteria, one 
may feel, as on e penetrates into a world where, as though in the Château 
of Silling itself, the appeal to ordinary standards evokes only sardonic silences. Nowhere, indeed, is Sade at such a remove from literature and its reassurances, nowhere does his assault upon ordinary standards reach 
such a pitch of unpitying absoluteness, nowhere is its violence so 
categorical or sustained for so long as in The 120 Days of Sodom.  To this 
darkest of novels, to this book of purest destruction, to this unsurpassed 
novel of terror and signal act of terrorism, Sade attached a capital 
importance. Chronologically, it was his first major work: the year was 1785, he was forty -five and by then had made up his mind about what 
his writer’s task was to consist of. This psychopathia sexualis  was to be its 
beginning and end. It was —it would have been—his definitive labor and 
“crime of love.”  
In themselves, the details of the manuscript’s disappearance and 
rediscovery make a remarkable story, whose essentials are given in the note preceding the work ; here we need only say that the grand event inaugurating the Revolution Sade awaited so impatiently cost him the 
text in which he had consigned everything of the most intimate and 
extreme of his own revolt. Over the loss of his 120 Days,  which was 
engulfe d in the pillage that followed the Bastille’s capture, they were 
“tears of blood” he wept. “It was, and Sade knew it, his masterpiece that 
had gone astray,” insists Maurice Heine in his preface to the first 
edition. “The remainder of his literary life was to be dominated by the concern to remedy the consequences of that irreparable accident. With 
painful perseverance he strove to attain again the mastery that had been 
his at the supreme height of his solitude and his misanthropy.”  
The life of the Marquis de  Sade was an incredible series of 
misfortunes, and what is perhaps most incredible of all was his capacity to withstand them. No doubt whatsoever, he invited trouble; it came his way unfailingly. Adversity or, more exactly, the cruel privations of 
confinem ent made Sade a writer in the first place —he said so, jubilantly, 
promising to take a prodigious revenge. Upon the prisoner’s fare of 
eternal anxiety his genius thrived, and the very frailty of words scratched 
on thin paper, the constant possibility that h is persecutors intervene, that 
authority arbitrarily confiscate or tear to pieces all he had toiled to put 
together, lent a further dimension to his helpless vulnerability and his rage.  
It was thanks to the Revolution that Sade obtained his freedom. 
Overjo yed at his release, eager to participate in the movement of his 
times, he soon found himself in another nightmare. His disappointment 
was almost immediate and withering; but this too he overcame. In 
prison he had learned patience and cunning and duplicity and the 
techniques of unfeeling indifference, of what he called apathy; and these 
were the resources he drew upon to survive in the midst of the Nation and to outlast the Reign of Virtue. When his lawyer Gaufridy wondered 
about the Marquis’ political views , “Citizen Sade” assured him they were 
just what circumstances demanded, and nothing if not “mobile.” Today it requires, more than mere naïveté to tax Sade with insincerity. If anyone hated the ancien régime,  it was he; but he realized at once 
something it  has taken French historians until now to be clear on: that, 
precious misunderstandings and popular duperies aside, 1789 was a proprietors’ uprising calculated to secure and consolidate the position 
and interests of the bourgeoisie alone. How little he sym pathized with 
the Incorruptible’s aim to bring forth a Republic cemented by blood 
Sade was able to illustrate when, as a judge, and to his mortal peril, he 
declined to sentence members of the opposition to death, explaining that 
while one might commit crim es for the sake of pleasure, it was not 
among his principles to murder in the name of justice.  
Elusive, paradoxical figure! On the one hand, Le Comte Oxtiern ou les 
Effets du Libertinage, presented to a public whose approval mattered so 
deeply to the playw right Sade; on the other hand, that “Theory of 
Libertinage”
1 Restif de la Bretonne had got wind of and shrilled against 
in advance of its eventual publication by “the monster -author” —the 
contrast is extreme and it is strange. What conclusions must one arrive at 
regarding the man who, while citing Samuel Richardson and the creator 
of Joseph Andrews as the outstanding explorers of “the human heart, Nature’s veritable labyrinth,” was filling the more than one hundred 
notebooks of Les Journées de Florbelle, ou la Nature dévoilée,  his effort to 
reconstitute The 120 Days?  
1 This is the name Restif de la Bretonne invented to identify The 120 Days of Sodom,  
whose real title he did not know, but of whose composition he had learned.                                           Again and again we are led back to a fundamental contradiction in 
Sade; and there, one senses, lies the entire problem of situating him. 
Introducing the volume that preceded this one, we alluded to the 
difficulty when we spoke of the two designs corresponding to two drives: to write in order to be read, and to write unreadably, in such a way as to 
preclude being read, and in answer to a very different but equally real 
purpose. To be known, and to be unknown; to divulge, and to conceal. 
To reintegrate society and broad daylight, and to hold to his cell, 
immuring himself in the night. Sade wanted both, and both at once.  
It was he who classified his works as L (lumière)  or S (sombre), or else 
signed s ome and refrained from acknowledging others, and even 
disavowed Justine,  his spiritual autobiography, so vigorously and so 
systematically protesting the allegations that the book was his as to 
establish the solidest grounds for suspicions to the contrary. Thus his 
“public” and his “clandestine” writings —if they represent antithetical 
attitudes and intentions —were in a dialectical sense complementary, and 
in a psychological sense inseparable. The drama of his life, precisely, was their reconciliation.  
A.W., R.S. 
 Part One  
CriticalM
ust We Burn Sade?  
by Simone de Beauvoir  
1 
“
Imperious, choleric, irascible, extreme in everything, with a dissolute 
imagination the like of which has never been seen, atheistic to the point 
of fanaticism, there you have me in a nutshell, and kill me again or take 
me as I am, for I shall not change.”  
They chose to kill him, first by slow degrees in the boredom of the 
dungeon and then by calumny and oblivion. This latter death he had himself desired. “The ditch once covered over, above it acorns shall be 
strewn in order that, the spot become green again and the copse grown back thick over it, the traces of my grave may disappear from the face of 
the earth as I trust the memory of me shall fade out of the minds of all 
men….”
1 This was the only one of his last wishes to be respected, 
though most carefully so. The memory of Sade has been disfigured by 
preposterous legends,2 his very name has buckled under the weight of 
1 From Sade’s “Last Will and Testament.” —Eds.  
2 The aging Sade ordering baskets of roses to be brought to him, smelling them 
voluptuously and soiling them afterward in the mud of the gutters with a sardonic 
laugh: present -day journalists have taught us how this kind of anecdote is 
manufactured.  such words as “sadism” and “sadistic.” His private journals have been 
lost, his manuscripts burned —the ten volumes of Les Journées de Florbelle 
at the instigation of his own son— his books banned. Though in the 
latter part of the nineteenth ce ntury Swinburne and a few other curious 
spirits became interested in his case, it was not until Apollinaire that he 
assumed his place in French literature. However, he is still a long way 
from having won it officially. One may glance through heavy, detaile d 
works on “The Ideas of the Eighteenth Century,” or even on “The 
Sensibility of the Eighteenth Century,” without once coming upon his 
name. It is understandable that as a reaction against this scandalous silence Sade’s enthusiasts have hailed him as a pro phetic genius; they 
claim that his work heralds Nietzsche, Stirner, Freud, and surrealism. But this cult, founded, like all cults, on a misconception, by deifying the “divine marquis” only betrays him. The critics who make of Sade neither 
villain nor idol,  but a man and a writer, can be counted upon the fingers 
of one hand. Thanks to them, Sade has come back at last to earth, 
among us.  
Just what is his place, however? Why does he merit our interest? Even 
his admirers will readily admit that his work is, for  the most part, 
unreadable; philosophically, it escapes banality only to founder in 
incoherence. As to his vices, they are not startlingly original; Sade 
invented nothing in this domain, and one finds in psychiatric treatises a profusion of cases at least as interesting as his. The fact is that it is 
neither as author nor as sexual pervert that Sade compels our attention; it 
is by virtue of the relationship which he created between these two 
aspects of himself. Sade’s aberrations begin to acquire value when, 
instead of enduring them as his fixed nature, he elaborates an immense 
system in order to justify them. Inversely, his books take hold of us as soon as we become aware that for all their repetitiousness, their 
platitudes and clumsiness, he is trying to c ommunicate an experience 
whose distinguishing characteristic is, nevertheless, a tendency to be incommunicable. Sade tried to make of his psycho- physical destiny an 
ethical choice; and of this act, in which he assumed his “separateness,” he 
attempted to ma ke an example and an appeal. It is thus that his 
adventure assumes a wide human significance. Can we, without 
renouncing our individuality, satisfy our aspirations to universality? Or is 
it only by the sacrifice of our individual differences that we can integrate 
ourselves into the community? This problem concerns us all. In Sade the differences are carried to the point of outrageousness, and the immensity 
of his literary effort shows how passionately he wished to be accepted by 
the human community. Thus, we find in his work the most extreme form of the conflict from which no individual can escape without self-
deception. It is the paradox and, in a sense, the triumph of Sade that his 
persistent singularity helps us to define the human drama in its general aspect.  
In order to understand Sade’s development, in order to grasp the share 
of his freedom in this story, in order to assess his success and his failure, 
it would be useful to have precise knowledge of the facts of his situation. 
Unfortunately, despite th e zeal of his biographers, Sade’s life and 
personality remain obscure on many points. We have no authentic 
portrait of him, and the contemporary descriptions which have come 
down to us are quite poor. The testimony at the Marseilles trial shows 
him at thir ty-two, “a handsome figure of a man, full faced,” of medium 
height, dressed in a gray dress coat and deep orange silk breeches, a 
feather in his hat, a sword at his side, a cane in his hand. Here he is at 
fifty-three, according to a residence certificate d ated the 7th of March, 1793: “Height: five feet two inches; hair: almost white; round face; 
receding hairline; blue eyes; medium nose; round chin.” The description 
of the 22nd of March, 1794, is a bit different: “Height: five feet two 
inches, medium nose, small mouth, round chin, grayish blond hair, high receding hairline, light blue eyes.” He seems by then to have lost his 
“handsome figure,” since he writes a few years later, in the Bastille, “I’ve 
taken on, for lack of exercise, such an enormous amount of fat that I can 
hardly move about.” It is this corpulence which first struck Charles 
Nodier when he met Sade in 1807 at Sainte -Pélagie. “An immense 
obesity which hindered his movements so as to prevent the exercise of 
those remains of grace and elegance th at still lingered in his general 
comportment. There remained, nevertheless, in his weary eyes an indefinable flash and brilliance which took fire from time to time, like a dying spark on a dead coal.” These testimonies, the only ones we 
possess, hardly enable us to visualize a particular face. It has been said
3 
that Nodier’s description recalls the aging Oscar Wilde; it suggests 
Robert de Montesquiou and Maurice Sachs as well, and it tempts us to 
imagine a bit of Charlus in Sade, but the data is very weak.  
Even more regrettable is the fact that we have so little information 
about his childhood. If we take the description of Valcour for an autobiographical sketch, Sade came to know resentment and violence at 
an early age. Brought up with Louis -Joseph de Bourb on, his 
contemporary, he seems to have defended himself against the selfish arrogance of the young prince with such displays of anger and brutality 
that he had to be taken away from court. Probably his stay in the gloomy 
3 Jean Desbordes:  Le vrai visage du marquis de Sade,  Paris, Nouvelle Review Critique, 
1939.                                           château of Saumane and in the decaying abbey of Ebreuil left its mark 
upon his imagination, but we know nothing significant about his brief 
years of study, his entry into the army, or his life as an amiable  man of 
fashion and debauchee. One might try to deduce his life from his work; 
this h as been done by Pierre Klossowski, who sees in Sade’s implacable 
hatred of his mother the key to his life and work. But he derives this hypothesis from the mother’s role in Sade’s writings. That is, he restricts himself to a description of Sade’s imaginary  world from a certain angle. 
He does not reveal its roots in the real world. In fact, we suspect a priori, and in accordance with certain general notions, the importance of Sade’s relationship with his father and mother; the particular details are not 
available to us. When we meet Sade he is already mature, and we do not 
know how he has become what he is. Ignorance forbids us to account for 
his tendencies and spontaneous behavior. His emotional nature and the 
peculiar character of his sexuality are for us d ata which we can merely 
note. Because of this unfortunate gap, the truth about Sade will always 
remain closed to us; any explanation would leave a residue which only 
the childhood history of Sade might have clarified.  
Nevertheless, the limits imposed on our understanding ought not to 
discourage us, for Sade, as we have said, did not restrict himself to a passive submission to the consequences of his early choices. His chief 
interest for us lies not in his aberrations, but in the manner in which he assumed r esponsibility for them. He made of his sexuality an ethic; he 
expressed this ethic in works of literature. It is by this deliberate act that Sade attains a real originality. The reason for his tastes is obscure, but we 
can understand how he erected these t astes into principles, and why he 
carried them to the point of fanaticism.  Superficially, Sade, at twenty- three, was like all other young 
aristocrats of his time; he was cultured, liked the theater and the arts, 
and was fond of reading. He was dissipated, kept a mistress —la 
Beauvoisin—and frequented the brothels. He married, without 
enthusiasm and in conformance to parental wishes, a young girl of the 
petty aristocracy, Renée- Pélagie de Montreuil, who was, however, rich. 
That was the beginning of the disast er that was to resound —and recur —
throughout his life. Married in May, Sade was arrested in October for 
excesses committed in a brothel which he had been frequenting for over 
a month. The reasons for arrest were grave enough for Sade to send letters, which went astray, to the governor of the prison, begging him to 
keep them secret, lest he be hopelessly ruined. This episode suggests that 
Sade’s eroticism had already assumed a disquieting character. This hypothesis is confirmed by the fact that a year later I nspector Marais 
warned the procuresses to stop giving their girls to the Marquis. But the interest of all this lies not in its value as information, but in the revelation which it constituted for Sade himself. On the verge of his 
adult life he made the bru tal discovery that there was no conciliation 
possible between his social existence and his private pleasures.  
There was nothing of the revolutionary nor even of the rebel about 
young Sade. He was quite prepared to accept society as it was. At the age 
of twenty -three he was obedient enough to his father
4 to accept a wife 
whom he disliked, and he envisaged no life other than the one to which 
4 Klossowski is surprised by the fact that Sade bore his father no ill will. But Sade 
did not instinctively detest authorit y. He admits the right of the individual to exploit 
and to abuse his privileges. At first, Sade, who was heir to the family fortune, fought 
society only on the individual, emotional level, through women: his wife and mother -
in-law.                                          his heredity destined him. He was to become a husband, father, marquis, 
captain, lord of the manor, and lieutenant -general. He had not the 
slightest wish to renounce the privileges assured by his rank and his wife’s fortune. Nevertheless, these things could not satisfy him. He was offered activities, responsibilities, and honors; nothing, no simple 
venture interested, amus ed, or excited him. He wished to be not only a 
public figure, whose acts are ordained by convention and routine, but a 
live human being as well. There was only one place where he could assert 
himself as such, and that was not the bed in which he was receiv ed only 
too submissively by a prudish wife, but in the brothel where he bought 
the right to unleash his fantasies.  
And there was one dream common to most young aristocrats of the 
time. Scions of a declining class which had once possessed concrete power, but which no longer retained any real hold on the world, they 
tried to revive symbolically, in the privacy of the bedchamber, the status 
for which they were nostalgic: that of the lone and sovereign feudal despot. The orgies of the Duke of Charolais, among others, were bloody 
and famous. Sade, too, thirsted for this illusion of power. “What does 
one want when one is engaged in the sexual act? That everything around 
you give you its utter attention, think only of you, care only for 
you…every man wants to be a tyrant when he fornicates.” The 
intoxication of tyranny leads directly to cruelty, for the libertine, in hurting the object that serves him, “tastes all the pleasures which a 
vigorous individual feels in making full use of his strength; he dominates, 
he is a tyrant.”  
Actually, whipping a few girls (for a consideration agreed upon in 
advance) is rather a petty feat; that Sade sets so much store on it is enough to cast suspicion upon him. We are struck by the fact that beyond the walls of his “little house” i t did not occur to him to “make 
full use of his strength.” There is no hint of ambition in him, no spirit of 
enterprise, no will to power, and I am quite prepared to believe that he 
was a coward. He does, to be sure, systematically endow his heroes with traits which society regards as flaws, but he paints Blangis with a 
satisfaction that justifies the assumption that this is a projection of himself, and the following words have the direct ring of a confession: “A steadfast child might have hurled this giant  into a panic …he would 
become timid and cowardly, and the mere thought of even the mildest combat, but fought on equal terms, would have sent him fleeing to the ends of the earth.” The fact that Sade was at times capable of extravagant 
boldness, both out of rashness and generosity, does not invalidate the 
hypothesis that he was afraid of people and, in a more general way, afraid of the reality of the world.  
If he talked so much about his strength of soul, it was not because he 
really possessed it, but becau se he longed for it. When faced with 
adversity, he would whine and get upset and become completely 
distraught. The fear of want which haunted him constantly was a 
symptom of a much more generalized anxiety. He mistrusted everything 
and everybody because he  felt himself maladjusted. He was maladjusted. 
His behavior was disorderly. He accumulated debts. He would fly into a 
rage for no reason at all, would run away, or would yield at the wrong moment. He fell into every possible trap. He was uninterested in th is 
boring and yet threatening world which had nothing valid to offer him and from which he hardly knew what to ask. He was to seek his truth 
elsewhere. When he writes that the passion of jealousy “subordinates and 
at the same time unites” all other passions, he gives us an exact 
description of his own experience. He subordinated his existence to his eroticism because eroticism appeared to him to be the only possible 
fulfillment of his existence. If he devoted himself to it with such energy, 
shamelessness, a nd persistence, he did so because he attached greater 
importance to the stories he wove around the act of pleasure than to the 
contingent happenings; he chose the imaginary.  
At first Sade probably thought himself safe in the fool’s paradise 
which seemed se parated from the world of responsibility by an 
impenetrable wall. And perhaps, had no scandal broken out, he would 
have been but a common debauchee, known in special places for rather 
special tastes. Many libertines of the period indulged with impunity in orgies even worse. But scandal was probably inevitable in Sade’s case. 
There are certain “sexual perverts” to whom the myth of Dr. Jekyll and 
Mr. Hyde is perfectly applicable. They hope, at first, to be able to gratify their “vices” without compromising th eir public characters. If they are 
imaginative enough to see themselves, little by little, in a dizziness of pride and shame, they give themselves away—like Charlus, despite his ruses, and even because of them. To what extent was Sade being 
provocative in his imprudence? There is no way of knowing. He 
probably wished to emphasize the radical separation between his family 
life and his private pleasures, and probably, too, the only way he could 
find satisfaction in this clandestine triumph lay in pushing it t o the point 
where it burst forth into the open. His surprise is like that of the child 
who keeps striking at a vase until it finally breaks. He was playing with 
fire and still thought himself master, but society was lying in wait. 
Society wants undisputed possession. It claims each individual 
unreservedly. It quickly seized upon Sade’s secret and classified it as 
crime.  Sade reacted at first with prayer, humility, and shame. He begged to 
be allowed to see his wife, accusing himself of having grievously 
offended her. He begged to confess and open his heart to the priest. 
This was not mere hypocrisy. A horrible change had taken place 
overnight; natural, innocent practices, which had been hitherto merely 
sources of pleasure, had become punishable acts. The young charmer 
had changed into a black sheep. He had probably been familiar since childhood—perhaps through his relations with his mother —with the 
bitter pangs of remorse, but the scandal of 1763 revived them dramatically. Sade had a foreboding that he would h enceforth, and for 
the rest of his life, be a culprit. For he valued his diversions too highly to 
think, even for a moment, of giving them up. Instead, he rid himself of 
shame through defiance. It is significant that his first deliberately scandalous act t ook place immediately after his imprisonment. La 
Beauvoisin accompanied him to the château of La Coste and, taking the name of Madame Sade, danced and played before the Provençal nobility, while the Abbé de Sade was forced to stand dumbly by. Society denie d 
Sade illicit freedom; it wanted to socialize eroticism. Conversely, the 
Marquis’ social life was to take place henceforth on an erotic level. Since 
one cannot, with any peace of mind, separate good from evil and devote 
one’s self to each in turn, one has  to assert evil in the face of good, and 
even as a function of good.  
Sade tells us repeatedly that his ultimate attitude has its roots in 
resentment. “Certain souls seem hard because they are capable of strong 
feelings, and they sometimes go to rather extreme lengths; their apparent 
unconcern and cruelty are but ways, known only to themselves, of feeling more strongly than others.”5 And Dolmancé6 attributes his vice to the 
wickedness of men. “ ’Twas  men’s ingratitude dried out my heart, their 
perfidy which d estroyed in me those baleful virtues for which, perhaps, 
like you, I was also born.” The fiendish morality which he later 
established in theoretical form was first a matter of actual experience.  
It was through Renée -Pélagie that Sade came to know all the 
insipidity and boredom of virtue. He lumped them together in the 
disgust which only a creature of flesh and blood can arouse. But he 
learned also from Renée, to his delight, that Good, in concrete, fleshly, 
individual form, can be vanquished in single comba t. His wife was not 
his enemy, but like all the wife -characters she inspired, a choice victim, a 
willing accomplice. The relationship between Blamont and his wife is 
probably a fairly precise reflection of Sade’s with the Marquise. Blamont takes pleasure i n caressing his wife at the very moment that he is 
hatching the blackest plots against her. To inflict enjoyment —Sade 
understood this 150 years before the psychoanalysts, and his works abound in victims submitted to pleasure before being tortured —can be a 
tyrannical violence; and the torturer disguised as lover delights to see the credulous lover, swooning with voluptuousness and gratitude, mistake cruelty for tenderness. The joining of such subtle pleasures with the 
performance of social obligation is doub tless what led Sade to have three 
children by his wife.  
And he had the further satisfaction of seeing virtue become the ally of 
vice, and its handmaiden. Madame de Sade concealed her husband’s 
delinquencies for years; she bravely engineered his escape from  Miolans, 
5 Aline et Valcour.  
6 Philosophy in the Bedroom.                                           fostered the intrigue between her sister and the Marquis, and later lent 
her support to the orgies at the château of La Coste. She went even so 
far as to inculpate herself when, in order to discredit the accusations of 
Nanon, she hid some silverware in Nanon’s bags. Sade never displayed the least gratitude. In fact, the notion of gratitude is one at which he 
keeps blasting away most furiously. But he very obviously felt for her the 
ambiguous friendship of the despot for what is unconditionally his . 
Thanks to her, he was able not only to reconcile his role of husband, 
father, and gentleman with his pleasures, but he established the dazzling 
superiority of vice over goodness, devotion, fidelity, and decency, and flouted society prodigiously by submit ting the institution of marriage 
and all the conjugal virtues to the caprices of his imagination and senses.  
If Renée -Pélagie was Sade’s most triumphant success, Madame de 
Montreuil, his mother -in-law, embodies his failure. She represents the 
abstract and universal justice which inevitably confronts the individual. It was against her that he most eagerly entreated his wife’s support. If he could win his case in the eyes of virtue, the law would lose much of its 
power, for its most formidable arms were neith er prison nor the scaffold, 
but the venom with which it could infect vulnerable hearts. Renée 
became perturbed under the influence of her mother. The young canoness grew fearful. A hostile society wormed its way into Sade’s 
household and dampened his pleas ures, and he himself yielded to its 
power. Defamed and dishonored, he began to doubt himself. And that 
was Madame de Montreuil’s supreme crime against him. A guilty man 
is, first of all, a man accused; it was she who made a criminal of Sade. 
That is why he  never left off ridiculing her, defaming her, and torturing 
her throughout his writings; he was killing off his own faults in her. 
There is a possible basis for Klossowski’s theory that Sade hated his own mother; the singular character of his sexuality sug gests this. But this 
hatred would never have been inveterate had not Renée’s mother made 
motherhood hateful to him. Indeed, she played such an important and 
frightful role in the life of her son- in-law that it may well be that she was 
the sole object of his attack. It is certainly she, in any case, whom he 
savagely submits to the jeers of her own daughter in the last pages of 
Philosophy in the Bedroom.  
If Sade was finally beaten by his mother -in-law and by the law, he was 
an accomplice to this defeat. Whate ver the role of chance and of his own 
imprudence in the scandal of 1763, there is no doubt that he afterward sought a heightening of his pleasures in danger. We may therefore say 
that he desired the very persecutions which he suffered with indignation. 
Choosing Easter Sunday to inveigle the beggar, Rose Keller, into his house at Arcueil meant playing with fire. Beaten, terrorized, 
inadequately guarded, she ran off, raising a scandal for which Sade paid 
with two short terms in prison.  
During the following th ree years of exile which, except for a few 
periods of service, he spent on his estate in Provence, he seemed sobered. 
He played the husband and lord of the manor most conscientiously. He 
had two children by his wife, received the homage of the community of 
Saumane, attended to his park, and read and produced plays, including 
one of his own, in his theater. But he was ill -rewarded for this edifying 
behavior. In 1771, he was imprisoned for debt. Once he was released, his 
virtuous zeal cooled off. He seduced h is young sister -in-law, of whom he 
seemed, for a while, genuinely fond. She was a canoness, a virgin, and 
his wife’s sister, all of which lent a certain zest to the adventure. 
Nevertheless, he went to seek still other distractions in Marseilles, and in 
1772 the “affair of the aphrodisiac candies” took on unexpected and terrifying proportions. While in flight to Italy with his sister -in-law, he 
and Latour, his valet, were sentenced to death in absentia, and both of 
them were executed in effigy on the town sq uare of Aix. The canoness 
took refuge in a French convent, where she spent the rest of her life, and 
he hid away in Savoy. He was caught and locked up in the château of 
Miolans, but his wife helped him escape. However, he was henceforth a 
hunted man. Wheth er roaming through Italy or shut up in his castle, he 
knew that he would never be allowed a normal life.  
Occasionally, he took his lordly role seriously. A troupe of actors was 
staying on his estate to present Le Mari cocu, battu et content.  Sade, 
irritate d perhaps by the title, ordered that the posters be defaced by the 
town clerk, as being “disgraceful and a challenge to the freedom of the Church.” He expelled from his property a certain Saint -Denis, against 
whom he had certain grievances, saying, “I have  every right to expel all 
loafers and vagrants from my property.” But these acts of authority were not enough to amuse him. He tried to realize the dream which was to haunt his books. In the solitude of the château of La Coste, he set up for 
himself a hare m submissive to his whims. With the aid of the Marquise, 
he gathered together several handsome valets, a secretary who was 
illiterate but attractive, a luscious cook, a chambermaid, and two young girls provided by bawds. But La Coste was not the inaccessib le fortress 
of The 120 Days of Sodom ; it was surrounded by society. The maids 
escaped, the chambermaid left to give birth to a child whose paternity she attributed to Sade, the cook’s father came to shoot Sade, and the 
handsome secretary was sent for by hi s parents. Only Renée -Pélagie 
conformed to the character assigned to her by her husband; all the others 
claimed the right to live their own lives, and Sade was once again made to understand that he could not turn the real world of hard fact into a 
theater.  
This world was not content to thwart his dreams; it repudiated him. 
Sade fled to Italy, but Madame de Montreuil, who had not forgiven him for having seduced her younger daughter, lay in wait for him. When he 
got back to France, he ventured into Paris, and  she took advantage of the 
occasion to have him locked up, on the 13th of February, 1777, in the 
château of Vincennes. He was sent back to Aix, was tried and fined there 
for his Marseilles escapade, and on his way back to Paris, under guard, 
he escaped and took refuge at La Coste, where, under the resigned eye 
of his wife, he embarked on the idyl with his housekeeper, Mademoiselle 
Rousset. But by the 7th of September, 1778, he was back again at 
Vincennes, “locked up behind nineteen iron doors, like a wild b east.”  
And now begins another story. For eleven years —first at Vincennes 
and then in the Bastille —a man lay dying in captivity, but a writer was 
being born. The man was quickly broken. Reduced to impotence, not knowing how long his imprisonment would last,  his mind wandered in 
delirious speculation. With minute calculations, though without any 
facts to work on, he tried to figure out how long his sentence would last. 
He recovered possession of his intellectual powers fairly quickly, as can 
be seen from his correspondence with Madame de Sade and 
Mademoiselle Rousset. But the flesh surrendered, and he sought compensation for his sexual starvation in the pleasures of the table. His 
valet, Carteron, tells us that “he smoked like a chimney” and “ate enough 
for four men” while in prison. “Extreme in everything,” as he himself 
declares, he became wolfish. He had his wife send him huge hampers of 
food, and he grew increasingly fat. In the midst of complaints, 
accusations, pleas, supplications, he still amused himself a bit by torturing the Marquise; he claimed to be jealous, accused her of plotting 
against him, and when she came to visit him, found fault with her 
clothes and ordered her to dress with extreme austerity. But these 
diversions were few and pallid. From 17 82 on, he demanded of literature 
alone what life would no longer grant him: excitement, challenge, 
sincerity, and all the delights of the imagination. And even then, he was 
“extreme”; he wrote as he ate, in a frenzy. After Dialogue between a Priest and a D ying Man  came The 120 Days of Sodom, Les Infortunes de la Vertu, 
Aline et Valcour.  According to the catalogue of 1788, he had by then 
written thirty -five acts for the theater, half a dozen tales, almost all of Le 
Portefeuille d’un homme de lettres,  and the  list is probably still incomplete.  
When Sade was freed, on Good Friday of 1790, he could hope and 
did hope that a new period lay open before him. His wife asked for a separation. His sons (one was preparing to emigrate and the other was a 
Knight of Malta)  were strangers to him; so was his “good, husky farm 
wench” of a daughter. Free of his family, he whom the old society had 
called an outcast was now going to try to adapt himself to the one which 
had just restored to him his dignity as a citizen. His plays  were 
performed in public; Oxtiern  was even a great success; he enrolled in the 
Piques Section and was appointed President; he enthusiastically wrote speeches and drew up petitions. But the idyl with the Revolution did not 
last long. Sade was fifty years o ld, had a questionable past and an 
aristocratic disposition, which his hatred of the aristocracy had not 
subdued, and he was once again at odds with himself. He was a 
republican and, in theory, even called for complete socialism and the 
abolition of proper ty, but insisted on keeping his castle and properties. 
The world to which he tried to adapt himself was again an all too real 
world whose brutal resistance wounded him. And it was a world governed by those universal laws which he regarded as abstract, fals e, 
and unjust. When society justified murder in their name, Sade withdrew 
in horror.  
Anyone who is surprised at Sade’s discrediting himself by his 
humaneness instead of seeking a governor’s post in the provinces, a post 
that would have enabled him to tortu re and kill to his heart’s content, 
does not really understand Sade. Does anyone suppose that he “liked 
blood” the way one likes the mountains or the sea? “Shedding blood” 
was an act whose meaning could, under certain conditions, excite him, 
but what he de manded, essentially, of cruelty was that it reveal to him 
particular individuals and his own existence as, on the one hand, 
consciousness and freedom and, on the other, as flesh. He refused to 
judge or condemn, or to witness anonymous death from afar. He h ad 
hated nothing so much in the old society as the claim to judge and 
punish, to which he himself had fallen victim; he could not excuse the 
Terror. When murder becomes constitutional, it becomes merely the hateful expression of abstract principles, someth ing without content, 
inhuman. And this is why Sade as Grand Juror almost always dismissed 
the charges against the accused. Holding their fate in his hands, he 
refused to harm the family of Madame de Montreuil in the name of the 
law. He was even led to resi gn from his office of President of the Piques 
Section. He wrote to Gaufridy: “I considered myself obliged to leave the 
chair to the vice -president; they wanted me to put a horrible, an 
inhuman act to a vote. I never would.” In December, 1793, he was impris oned on charges of “moderatism.” Released 375 days later, he 
wrote with disgust: “My government imprisonment, with the guillotine 
before my eyes, did me a hundred times more harm than all the Bastilles 
imaginable.” It is by such wholesale slaughters that t he body politic shows only too clearly that it considers men as a mere collection of 
objects, whereas Sade demanded a universe peopled with individual 
beings. The “evil” which he had made his refuge vanished when crime 
was justified by virtue. The Terror, which was being carried out with a clear conscience, constituted the most radical negation of Sade’s 
demoniacal world.  
“The excesses of the Terror,” wrote Saint -Just, “have dulled the taste 
for crime.” Sade’s sexuality was not stilled by age and fatigue al one; the 
guillotine killed the morbid poetry of eroticism. In order to derive 
pleasure from the humiliation and exaltation of the flesh, one must ascribe value to the flesh. It has no sense, no worth, once one casually 
begins to treat man as a thing. Sade was still able to revive his past 
experience and his old universe in his books, but he no longer believed in them with his blood and nerves. There is nothing physical in his 
attachment to the woman he calls “The Sensitive Lady.” He derived his 
only erotic pleasures from the contemplation of the obscene paintings, inspired by Justine, with which he decorated a secret chamber. He still 
had his memories, but he had lost his drive, and the simple business of 
living was too much for him. Liberated from the socia l and familial 
framework which he nevertheless needed, he dragged on through 
poverty and illness. He quickly ran through the money realized from the 
unprofitable sale of La Coste. He took refuge with a farmer, and then in a garret, with the son of “The Sen sitive Lady,” while earning forty sous  a 
day working in the theatricals at Versailles.  
The decree of the 28th of June, 1799, which forbade the striking of 
his name from the list of aristocratic émigrés  on which it had been 
placed, made him cry out in despair: “Death and misery, this then is the recompense I receive for my everlasting devotion to the Republic.” He received, however, a certificate of residence and citizenship; and in 
December, 1799, he played the part of Fabrice in Oxtiern.  But by the 
beginning of 1800, he was in the hospital of Versailles, “dying of cold and hunger,” and threatened with imprisonment for debt. He was so unhappy in the hostile world of so- called “free” men that one wonders 
whether he had not chosen to be led back to the solitude and security of prison. We may say, at least, that the imprudence of circulating Justine  
and the folly of publishing Zoloé,  in which he attacks Josephine, Tallien, 
Madame Tallien, Barras, and Bonaparte, imply that he was not too repelled by the idea of another confinement.
7 Conscious or not, his wish 
was granted; he was locked up in Sainte -Pélagie on the 5th of April, 
1801, and it was there, and later at Charenton —where he was followed 
by Madame Quesnet, who, by pretending to be his daughter, obtained a room near his own— that he lived out the rest of his life.  
Of course, Sade protested and struggled as soon as he was shut up, 
and he continued to do so for years. But at least he was able again to devote himself in peace to the passion which had replaced sen sual 
pleasure: his writing. He wrote on and on. Most of his papers had been 
lost when he had left the Bastille, and he thought that the manuscript of 
The 120 Days of Sodom —a fifteen- yard roll which he had carefully 
hidden and which was saved without his knowing it —had been 
destroyed. After Philosophy in the Bedroom,  published in 1795, he 
composed a new opus, a modified and completely developed version of 
7 Since the present essay was written, it has been proved that Sade was not actually 
the author of  Zoloé,  and the French publisher of Sade’s complete works, Jean -Jacques 
Pauvert, has withdrawn the work from his catalogue. None the less, since Napoleon 
lacked the findings of this recent scholarship, it is very possible that Sade’s presumed 
authorship of the pamphlet did in fact contribute to his reincarceration. —Eds.                                           Justine,  followed by Juliette.  These two volumes, of which he disclaimed 
the authorship, appeared in a t en-volume edition in 1797. He had Les 
Crimes de l’Amour  publicly printed. At Sainte -Pélagie, he became 
absorbed in an immense ten- volume work, Les Journées de Florbelle.  The 
two volumes of La Marquise de Gange  must also be attributed to him, 
though the wor k did not appear under his name.  
Probably because the meaning of his life lay henceforth in his work as 
a writer, Sade now hoped only for peace in his daily life. He took walks 
with “The Sensitive Lady” in the garden of the retreat, wrote comedies 
for the patients, and had them performed. He agreed to compose a divertissement  on the occasion of a visit to Charenton in 1812 by the 
Archbishop of Paris. On Easter Sunday, 1805, he distributed the holy bread and took up the collection in the parish church. His w ill proves 
that he had renounced none of his beliefs, but he was tired of fighting. 
“He was polite to the point of obsequiousness,” says Nodier, “gracious to 
the point of unctuousness …and he spoke respectfully of everything the 
world respects.” According t o Ange Pitou, the ideas of old age and of 
death horrified him. “This man turned pale at the idea of death, and 
would faint at the sight of his white hair.” He expired in peace, however, 
carried off by “a pulmonary congestion in the form of asthma” on the 
2nd of December, 1814.  
The salient feature of his tormented life was that the painful 
experience of living never revealed to him any solidarity between other men and himself. The last scions of a decadent aristocracy had no 
common purpose to unite them. In the solitude to which his birth 
condemned him, Sade carried erotic play to such extremes that his peers 
turned against him. When a new world opened to him, it was too late; 
he was weighed down with too heavy a past. At odds with himself, suspect to others,  this aristocrat, haunted by dreams of despotism, could 
not sincerely ally himself with the rising bourgeoisie. And though he was 
roused to indignation by its oppression of the people, the people were 
nevertheless foreign to him. He belonged to none of the  classes whose 
mutual antagonisms were apparent to him. He had no fellow but 
himself. Perhaps, had his emotional make -up been different, he might 
have resisted this fate, but he seems always to have been violently 
egocentric. His indifference to external e vents, his obsessive concern 
with money, the finical care with which he worked out his debauches, as well as the delirious speculations at Vincennes and the schizophrenic character of his dreams, reveal a radically introverted character. Though 
this passionate self -absorption defined his limits, it also gave his life an 
exemplary character, so that we examine it today.  
2 
Sade made of his eroticism the meaning and expression of his whole 
existence. Thus, it is no idle curiosity that leads us to define its na ture. 
To say with Maurice Heine that he tried everything and liked everything 
is to beg the question. The term “algolagnia” hardly helps us to 
understand Sade. He obviously had very marked sexual idiosyncrasies, 
but they are not easy to define. His accompl ices and victims kept quiet. 
Two flagrant scandals merely pushed aside, for a moment, the curtain behind which debauch usually hides. His journals and memoirs have been lost, his letters were cautious, and in his books he invents more 
than he reveals about  himself. “I have imagined everything conceivable 
in this sort of thing,” he writes, “but I have certainly not done, and 
certainly never will, all that I have imagined.” His work has not 
unreasonably been compared to the Psychopathia Sexualis  of Krafft -Ebing, to whom no one would dream of attributing all the perversions 
he catalogued.  
Thus, Sade established systematically, according to the prescriptions 
of a kind of synthetic art, a repertory of man’s sexual possibilities. He 
certainly never experienced nor  even dreamed them all up himself. Not 
only does he tell tall stories, but most of the time he tells them badly. His tales resemble the engravings that illustrate the 1797 edition of Justine  and Juliette.  The characters’ anatomy and positions are drawn 
with a minute realism, but the awkward and monotonous 
expressionlessness of their faces makes their horrible orgies seem utterly unreal. It is not easy to derive a genuine testimony from all the cold -
blooded orgies that Sade concocted. Nevertheless, there are  some 
situations in his novels which he treats with special indulgence. He shows special sympathy with some of his heroes, for example, Noirceuil, 
Blangis, and Gernande, and particularly Dolmancé, to whom he 
attributes many of his own tastes and ideas. Som etimes, too, in a letter, 
an incident, or a turn of dialogue, we are struck unexpectedly by a vivid 
phrase which we feel is not the mere echo of a foreign voice. It is 
precisely such scenes, heroes, and texts as these that we must examine 
closely.  
In the p opular mind, sadism means cruelty. The first thing that strikes 
us in Sade’s work is actually that which tradition associates with his 
name: beatings, bloodshed, torture, and murder. The Rose Keller 
incident shows him beating his victim with a cat -o’-nine-tails and a 
knotted cord and, probably,
8 slashing her with a knife and pouring wax 
on the wounds. In Marseilles, he took from his pockets a parchment 
8 Sade’s confessions do not corroborate Rose Keller’s testimony on this point.                                           “cat” covered with bent pins and asked for switches of heather. In all his 
behavior toward his wife, he di splayed obvious mental cruelty. Moreover, 
he has repeatedly expressed himself on the pleasure to be derived from making people suffer. But he hardly enlightens us when he merely repeats the classical doctrine of animal spirits. “It is simply a matter of 
jangling all our nerves with the most violent possible shock. Now, since 
there can be no doubt that pain affects us more strongly than pleasure, 
when this sensation is produced in others, our very being will vibrate 
more vigorously with the resulting shocks. ” Sade does not eliminate the 
mystery of the conscious pleasure which follows from this violent 
vibration. Fortunately, he suggests more honest explanations elsewhere.  
The fact is that the original intuition which lies at the basis of Sade’s 
entire sexuali ty, and hence his ethic, is the fundamental identity of 
coition and cruelty. “Would the paroxysm of pleasure be a kind of 
madness if the mother of the human race [Nature] had not intended that 
anger and the sexual act express themselves in the same way? Wh at able -
bodied man …does not wish …to bedevil his ecstasy?” Sade’s description 
of the Duc de Blangis in the throes of orgasm is certainly to be 
interpreted as a transposition in epic terms of Sade’s own practices: 
“…frightful cries, atrocious blasphemies spr ang from the Duc’s swollen 
breast, flames seemed to dart from his eyes, he foamed at the mouth, he 
whinnied like a stallion…” and he even strangled his partner. According to Rose Keller’s testimony, Sade himself “began to shriek very loud and 
fearfully” be fore cutting the cords which immobilized his victim. The 
“Vanilla and Manilla” letter proves that he experienced orgasm as if it 
were an epileptic seizure, something aggressive and murderous, like a fit 
of rage.  How are we to explain this peculiar violence ? Some readers have 
wondered whether Sade was not, in fact, sexually deficient. Many of his 
heroes —among them his great favorite, Gernande —are inadequately 
equipped, and have great difficulty in erection and ejaculation. Sade 
must certainly have been aware  of these problems but such semi -
impotence seems rather to have been the result of excessive indulgence, as in the case of many of his debauchees, several of whom are very well endowed. Sade makes frequent allusions to his own vigorous 
temperament. It is, on the contrary, a combination of passionate sexual 
appetites with a basic emotional “apartness” which seems to me to be the key to his eroticism.  
From adolescence to prison, Sade had certainly known the insistent, if 
not obsessive, pangs of desire. There is, on the other hand, an experience which he seems never to have known: that of emotional intoxication. 
Never in his stories does sensual pleasure appear as self -forgetfulness, 
swooning, or abandon. Compare, for example, Rousseau’s outpourings 
with the fr enzied blasphemies of a Noirceuil or a Dolmancé, or the 
flutters of the Mother Superior in Diderot’s La Religieuse  with the brutal 
pleasures of Sade’s tribades. The male aggression of the Sadean hero is never softened by the usual transformation of the bod y into flesh. He 
never for an instant loses himself in his animal nature; he remains so lucid, so cerebral, that philosophic discourse, far from dampening his 
ardor, acts as an aphrodisiac. We see how desire and pleasure explode 
into furious crisis in this  cold, tense body, impregnable to all 
enchantment. They do not constitute a living experience within the 
framework of the subject’s psycho- physiological unity. Instead, they blast 
him, like some kind of bodily accident.  As a result of this immoderation, th e sexual act creates the illusion of 
sovereign pleasure which gives it its incomparable value in Sade’s eyes, 
for all his sadism strove to compensate for the absence of one necessary 
element which he lacked. The state of emotional intoxication allows one to grasp existence in one’s self and in the other, as both subjectivity and 
passivity. The two partners merge in this ambiguous unity; each one is freed of his own presence and achieves immediate communication with the other. The curse which weighed upon Sa de—and which only his 
childhood could explain —was this “autism” which prevented him from 
ever forgetting himself or being genuinely aware of the reality of the other person. Had he been cold by nature, no problem would ever have 
arisen; but his instincts d rove him toward outside objects with which he 
was incapable of uniting, so that he was forced to invent singular 
methods for taking them by force. Later, when his desires were 
exhausted, he continued to live in that erotic universe of which, out of 
sensual ity, boredom, defiance, and resentment, he had constructed the 
only world which counted for him; and the aim of his strategies was to 
induce erection and orgasm. But even when these were easy for him, 
Sade needed deviations to give to his sexuality a meaning which lurked 
in it without ever managing to achieve fulfillment, an escape from 
consciousness in his flesh, an understanding of the other person as 
consciousness through the flesh.  
Normally, it is as a result of the vertigo of the other made flesh that 
one is spellbound within one’s own flesh. If the subject remains confined within the solitude of his consciousness, he escapes this agitation and 
can rejoin the other only by conscious performance. A cold, cerebral 
lover watches eagerly the enjoyment of hi s mistress and needs to affirm 
his responsibility for it because he has no other way of attaining his own fleshly state. This behavior, which compensates for separateness by 
deliberate tyranny, may properly be called “sadistic.” Sade knew, as we 
have seen,  that the infliction of pleasure may be an aggressive act, and 
his tyranny sometimes took on this character, but it did not satisfy him. 
To begin with, he shrinks from the kind of equality which is created by 
mutual pleasure. “If the objects who serve us feel ecstasy, they are then 
much more often concerned with themselves than with us, and our own enjoyment is consequently impaired. The idea of seeing another person 
experience the same pleasure reduces one to a kind of equality which 
spoils the unutterable  charms that come from despotism.” And he 
declares, more categorically, “Any enjoyment is weakened when shared.”  
And besides, pleasant sensations are too mild; it is when the flesh is 
torn and bleeding that it is revealed most dramatically as flesh. “No ki nd 
of sensation is keener and more active than that of pain; its impressions 
are unmistakable.” But in order for me to become flesh and blood 
through the pains I have inflicted, I must recognize my own state in the passivity of the other. Therefore, the pe rson must have freedom and 
consciousness. The libertine “would really deserve pity if he acted upon 
an inert, unfeeling object.” That is why the contortions and moans of the 
victim are necessary to the torturer’s happiness, which explains why 
Verneuil made  his wife wear a kind of headgear that amplified her 
screams. In his revolt, the tortured object asserts himself as my fellow 
creature, and through his intervention I achieve the synthesis of spirit 
and flesh which was first denied me.  
If the aim is both to escape from one’s self and to discover the reality 
of other existences, there is yet another way open: to have one’s flesh mortified by others. Sade is quite aware of this. When he used the cat -
o’-nine-tails and the switch in Marseilles, it was not only to whip others with, but also to be whipped himself. This was probably one of his most 
common practices, and all his heroes happily submit to flagellation. “No 
one doubts nowadays that flagellation is extremely effective in restoring 
the vigor destroyed by  the excesses of pleasure.” There was another way 
of giving concrete form to his passivity. In Marseilles, Sade was 
sodomized by his valet, Latour, who seems to have been accustomed to 
render him this sort of service. His heroes imitate him sedulously, and  he 
declared aloud in no uncertain terms that the greatest pleasure is derived 
from a combination of active and passive sodomy. There is no perversion 
of which he speaks so often and with so much satisfaction, and even impassioned vehemence.  
Two questions immediately arise for those given to labeling 
individuals. Was Sade a sodomite? Was he basically a masochist? As to sodomy, his physical appearance, the role played by his valets, the 
presence at La Coste of the handsome, illiterate secretary, the enormous  
importance which Sade accords to this “fantasy” in his writings, and the 
passion with which he advocates it, all confirm the fact that it was one of 
the essential elements of his sexual character. Certainly, women played a 
great role in his life, as they do in his work. He knew many, had kept 
Mlle. Beauvoisin and other less important mistresses, had seduced his 
sister -in-law, had gathered young women and little girls together at the 
château of La Coste, had flirted with Mademoiselle Rousset, and ended 
his life at the side of Madame Quesnet, to say nothing of the bonds, 
imposed by society but reworked in his own fashion, which united him with Madame de Sade. But what were his relations with her? It is 
significant that in the only two testimonies on his sexua l activity, there is 
no evidence that Sade “knew” his partners in a normal way. In Rose 
Keller’s case, he satisfied himself by whipping her without touching her. He asked the Marseilles prostitute to let herself be “known from behind” 
by his servant or, if she preferred, by himself. When she refused, he 
contented himself with fondling her while he was being “known” by Latour.  
His heroes amuse themselves by deflowering little girls. This bloody 
and sacrilegious violence tickled Sade’s fancy. But even when th ey are 
initiating virgins, they often treat them as boys rather than make them bleed. More than one of Sade’s characters feels a deep disgust for 
women’s “fronts.” Others are more eclectic in taste, but their preferences 
are clear. Sade never sang the prai ses of that part of the female body so 
joyously celebrated in The Arabian Nights.  He has only contempt for the 
poor “unmanly creatures” who possess their wives in conventional fashion. If he had children by Madame de Sade, we have seen under what circumsta nces; and in view of the strange group orgies at La Coste, 
what proof is there that it was really he who was responsible for Nanon’s pregnancy?  
We must not, of course, attribute to Sade the opinions held by the 
confirmed homosexuals of his novels, but the argument put into the 
mouth of the Bishop in The 120 Days of Sodom  is close enough to his 
heart to be considered as a confession. He says, concerning pleasure, 
“…the boy is worth more than the girl. Consider the problem from the 
point of view of evil, evil  being almost always pleasure’s true and major 
charm; considered thus, the crime must appear greater when perpetrated upon a being of your identical sort than when inflicted upon one which 
is not, and this once established, the delight automatically double s.” It 
was easy enough for Sade to write to Madame de Sade that his sole 
wrong had been “to love women too much”; this was a purely official and 
hypocritical letter. And it is through a mythical dialectic that he gives them the most triumphant roles in his  novels. Their wickedness makes a 
striking contrast with the traditional gentleness of their sex. When they 
overcome their natural abjection by committing crime, they demonstrate 
much more brilliantly than any man that no situation can dampen the ardor of a bold spirit. But if, in imagination, they become first -rate 
martinets, it is because they are, in reality, born victims.  
The contempt and disgust which Sade really felt for these servile, 
tearful, mystified, and passive creatures run all through his work . Was it 
his mother whom he loathed in them? We may also wonder whether Sade did not hate women because he saw in them his double rather than his complement and because there was nothing he could get from them. 
His great female villains have more warmth an d life than his heroes, not 
only for esthetic reasons but because they were closer to him. I do not 
recognize him at all, as some readers claim to, in the bleating Justine,
9 
but there is certainly something of him in Juliette, who proudly and contentedly s ubmits to the same treatment as her sister. Sade felt himself 
to be feminine, and he resented the fact that women were not the males 
he really desired. He endows Durand, the greatest and most extravagant 
of them all, with a huge clitoris which enables her to behave sexually like a man.  
It is impossible to tell to what extent women were anything but 
surrogates and toys for Sade. It may be said, however, that his sexual character was essentially anal. This is confirmed by Sade’s attachment to 
money. Trouble involving embezzlement of inheritances played an 
9 See especially Jean Paulhan: “The Marquis de Sade and His Accomplice,” which 
appears in the introductory section to The Marquis de Sade:  The Complete Justine, 
Philosophy in the Bedroom, and Other Writings.  New York, Grove Press, 1965. —Eds.                                           enormous role in his life. Theft appears in his work as a sexual act, and 
the mere suggestion of it is enough to cause orgasm. And though we 
may refuse to accept the Freudian interpretation of greed, there is  the 
indisputable fact, which Sade openly acknowledged, of his coprophilia. 
In Marseilles, he gave a prostitute some sugar almonds, telling her that 
“they would make her break wind,” and he looked disappointed when 
nothing happened. We are also struck by t he fact that the two “fantasies” 
which he tries to explain most fully are cruelty and coprophagy. To what 
extent did he practice them? It is a far cry from the practices begun in 
Marseilles to the excremental orgies of The 120 Days of Sodom,  but the 
care w ith which he describes the latter practices, and particularly the 
preparations, proves that they were not merely cold and schematic inventions, but emotional fantasies.  
On the other hand, Sade’s extraordinary gluttony in prison cannot be 
explained by idlen ess alone. Eating can be a substitute for erotic activity 
only if there is still some infantile equivalence between gastrointestinal and sexual functions. This certainly persisted in Sade. He sees a close 
bond between the food orgy and the erotic orgy. “Th ere is no passion 
more closely involved with lechery than drunkenness and gluttony,” he 
points out. And this combination reaches a climax in anthropophagous fantasies. To drink blood, to swallow sperm and excrement, and to eat 
children mean appeasing desir e through destruction of its object. 
Pleasure requires neither exchange, giving, reciprocity, nor gratuitous 
generosity. Its tyranny is that of avarice, which chooses to destroy what it 
cannot assimilate.  
Sade’s coprophilia has still another meaning. “If it is the dirty element 
that gives pleasure in the act of lust, then the dirtier it is, the more pleasurable it is bound to be.” Among the most obvious sexual attractions, Sade includes old age, ugliness, and bad odors. His linking of 
eroticism with vilenes s is as original as his linking it with cruelty, and 
can be explained in like manner. Beauty is too simple. We grasp it by an intellectual evaluation which does not free consciousness from its solitude or the body from its indifference, whereas vileness is  debasing. 
The man who has relations with filth, like the man who wounds or is wounded, fulfills himself as flesh. It is in its misery and humiliation that the flesh becomes a gulf in which consciousness is swallowed up and 
where separate individuals are u nited. Only by being beaten, penetrated, 
and befouled could Sade succeed in destroying its obsessive presence.  
He was not, however, masochistic in the ordinary sense of the word. 
He sneers bitterly at men who become slaves to women. “I leave them to 
the base pleasure of wearing the chains with which Nature has given them the right to burden others. Let such animals vegetate in the 
baseness of their abjection.” The world of the masochist is a magical one, 
and that is why he is almost always a fetishist. Obje cts such as shoes, 
furs, and whips, are charged with emanations which have the power to 
change him into a thing, and that is precisely what he wants: to remove 
himself by becoming an inert object. Sade’s world is essentially rational 
and practical. The obj ects, whether material or human, which serve his 
pleasure are tools which have no mystery, and he clearly sees humiliation 
as a haughty ruse. Saint -Fond, for example, says: “The humiliation of 
certain acts of debauchery serves as a pretext for pride.” And Sade 
elsewhere says of the libertine that “the degradation which characterizes 
the state into which you plunge him by punishing him pleases, amuses, 
and delights him. Deep down he enjoys having gone so far as to deserve 
being treated in such a way.”  Nevert heless, these two attitudes are intimately related. If the 
masochist wants to lose himself, he does so in order to be entranced by 
the object with which he hopes to merge, and this effort leads him back 
to his subjectivity. In demanding that his partner mistreat him, he tyrannizes him; his humiliating exhibitions and the tortures he 
undergoes humiliate and torture the other as well. And, vice versa, by 
befouling and hurting the other, the torturer befouls and hurts himself. He participates in the passivity which he discloses, and in wanting to 
apprehend himself as the cause of the torment he inflicts, it is as an 
instrument and therefore as an object that he perceives himself. We are thus justified in classing behavior of this kind under the name of sado-
masochism. However, we must be careful, for despite the generality of 
the term, the concrete forms of this behavior may be quite varied. Sade 
was not Sacher -Masoch. What was peculiar in his case was the tension 
of a will bent on fulfilling the flesh without l osing itself in it. In 
Marseilles, he had himself whipped, but every couple of minutes he would dash to the mantelpiece and, with a knife, would inscribe on the 
chimney flue the number of lashes he had just received. His humiliation 
would immediately be tr ansformed into swagger. While being 
sodomized, he would whip a prostitute. It was a favorite fantasy of his to 
be penetrated and beaten while he himself was penetrating and beating a 
submissive victim.  
I have already said that to regard Sade’s peculiaritie s as simple facts is 
to misunderstand their meaning and implication. They are always charged with an ethical significance. With the scandal of 1763, Sade’s 
eroticism ceased to be merely an individual attitude: it was also a 
challenge to society. In a lette r to his wife, Sade explains how he has 
erected his tastes into principles. “I carry these principles and tastes to the point of fanaticism,” he writes, “and the fanaticism is the work of my 
tyrants and their persecutions.” The supreme intention that quick ens all 
sexual activity is the will to criminality. Whether through cruelty or befoulment, the aim is to attain evil. Sade immediately experienced coitus as cruelty, laceration, and transgression; and out of resentment he 
obstinately justified its morbidit y. Since society united with Nature in 
regarding his pleasures as criminal, he made crime itself a pleasure. 
“Crime is the soul of lust. What would pleasure be if it were not 
accompanied by crime? It is not the object of debauchery that excites us, 
but rat her the idea of evil.” In the pleasure of torturing and mocking a 
beautiful woman, he writes, “there is the kind of pleasure which comes 
from sacrilege or the profanation of the objects offered us for worship.” 
It was not by chance that he chose Easter as the day to whip Rose Keller, and it was at the moment that he sardonically suggested that he confess 
her that his sexual excitement reached its climax. No aphrodisiac is so 
potent as the defiance of Good. “Our desires for great crimes are always more viole nt than our desires for small ones.” Did Sade do evil in order 
to feel guilty, or did he escape guilt by assuming it? To reduce him to 
one or another of these attitudes is to deform him. He never remains at 
rest in a state either of self- satisfied abjectio n or of flighty impudence, 
but keeps oscillating back and forth dramatically between arrogance and 
a guilty conscience.  
Thus, we can perceive the significance of Sade’s cruelty and 
masochism. This man, who combined a violent temperament —though 
quickly exhausted, it would seem —with an emotional “apartness” almost 
pathological in character, sought a substitute for anxiety in the infliction 
of suffering or pain. The meaning of his cruelty is very complex. In the 
first place, it seems to be the extreme and imme diate fulfillment of the instinct of coitus, its total assumption. It asserts the radical separation of 
the other object from the sovereign subject. It aims at the jealous 
destruction of what cannot be greedily assimilated. But, above all, rather 
than crowning the orgasm impulsively, it tends to induce it by premeditation. It enabled him to apprehend through the other person 
the consciousness -flesh unity and to project it into himself. And, lastly, 
it freely justified the criminal character which Nature and society had 
assigned to eroticism. Moreover, by being sodomized, beaten, and 
befouled, Sade also gained insight into himself as passive flesh. He 
slaked his thirst for self -punishment and accepted the guilt to which he 
had been doomed. And this enabled hi m to revert immediately from 
humility to pride through the medium of defiance. In the completely sadistic scene, the individual gives vent to his nature, fully aware that it is evil and aggressively assuming it as such. He merges vengeance and 
transgressio n and transforms the latter into glory.  
There is one act which stands as the most extreme conclusion of both 
cruelty and masochism, for the subject asserts himself in it, in a very special way, as tyrant and criminal; I am speaking of murder. It has often 
been maintained that murder was the supreme end of sexuality in Sade. 
To my mind, this view is based on a misunderstanding. Certainly the 
vigor with which Sade denied in his letters that he had ever been a 
murderer was a matter of self -defense, but I think  that he was sincerely 
repelled by the idea. He does, of course, overload his stories with 
monstrous slaughters. But he does so because there is no crime whose 
abstract significance is so glaringly obvious as murder. It represents the 
exacerbated demand fo r unrestrained and fearless freedom. And besides, 
by indefinitely prolonging the death throes of his victim, the author can 
perpetuate on paper the exceptional moment in which a lucid mind inhabits a body which is being degraded into matter. He still breat hes a 
living past into the unconscious remains. But what would the tyrant 
actually do with this inert object, a corpse?  
There is, no doubt, something vertiginous in the transition from life 
to death; and the sadist, fascinated by the conflicts between 
consciousness and the flesh, readily pictures himself as the agent of so 
radical a transformation. But though he may occasionally carry out this 
singular experiment, it cannot possibly afford him the supreme 
satisfaction. The freedom that one hoped to tyranniz e to the point of 
annihilation has, in being destroyed, slipped away from the world in 
which tyranny had a hold on it. If Sade’s heroes commit endless 
massacres, it is because none of them gives full satisfaction. They bring 
no concrete solution to the problems which torment the debauchee, because pleasure is not his sole end. No one would seek sensation so 
passionately and recklessly, even if it had the violence of an epileptic 
seizure. The ultimate trauma must, rather, guarantee by its obviousness the suc cess of an undertaking whose stake exceeds it infinitely. But 
often, however, this ultimate trauma puts an end to the undertaking 
without concluding it, and though the trauma may be prolonged by 
murder, such a murder merely confirms its failure.  
Blangis st rangles his partners with the very fury of orgasm, and there 
is despair in the rage wherein desire is extinguished without finding 
satisfaction. His premeditated pleasures are less wild and more complex. 
An episode from Juliette,  among others, is significa nt. Excited by the 
young woman’s conversation, Noirceuil, who “cared little for solitary 
pleasures,” that is, those in which one indulges with a single partner, 
immediately calls in his friends. “There are too few of us …. No, leave 
me…. My passions, concentrated on a single point, resemble the rays of a sun assembled by a magnifying glass: they immediately set fire to 
whatever object they find in their way ….” It is not out of any abstract 
scruples that he forbids himself such excesses, but rather because af ter 
the brutal orgasm he would find himself frustrated again. Our instincts indicate to us ends which are unattainable if we merely act upon our 
immediate impulses. We must master them, reflect upon them, and use 
our wits in trying to find ways of satisfying them. The presence of other consciousnesses than our own is what helps us most to get the necessary 
perspective on them.  
Sade’s sexuality is not a biological matter. It is a social fact. The orgies 
in which he indulged were almost always collective affa irs. In Marseilles, 
he asked for two prostitutes and was accompanied by his valet. At La 
Coste, he set up a harem for himself. The libertines in his novels form actual communities. The first advantage was the number of 
combinations for their debauches, but  there were deeper reasons for the 
socialization of eroticism. In Marseilles, Sade called his valet “Monsieur 
le Marquis” and wanted to see him “know” a prostitute under his name 
rather than “know” her himself. The enactment of the erotic scene 
interested him more than the actual experience. The fantasies in The 120 
Days of Sodom  are narrated before being carried out. By means of this 
duplication the act becomes a spectacle which one observes from a 
distance at the same time that one is performing it. It th us retains the 
meaning that would otherwise be obscured by solitary animal 
excitement. For if the debauchee coincided exactly with his movements 
and the victim with his emotions, freedom and consciousness would be 
lost in the rapture of the flesh. The fles h would be merely brute 
suffering, and the rapture merely convulsive pleasure. Thanks, however, 
to the assembled witnesses, a presence is maintained about them which helps the subject himself remain present. It is through these 
performances that he hopes t o reach out to himself; and in order to see 
himself, he must be seen. Sade, while tyrannizing, was an object for those who watched him.  
Conversely, by witnessing on the flesh to which he had done violence 
the violence which he himself had borne, he reposse ssed himself as 
subject within his own passivity. The merging of the for -oneself and the 
for-the-other is thus achieved. Accomplices are particularly required in 
order to give sexuality a demoniacal dimension. Thanks to them, the act, whether committed or suffered, takes on definite form instead of being diluted into contingent moments. By becoming real, any crime proves to 
be possible and ordinary. One gets to be so intimately familiar with it 
that one has difficulty in regarding it as blameworthy. In orde r to amaze 
or frighten oneself, one must observe oneself from a distance, through 
foreign eyes.  
However precious this recourse to others may be, it is not yet enough 
to remove the contradictions implied in the sadistic effort. If one fails, in the course of an actual experience, to grasp the ambiguous unity of 
existence, one will never succeed in reconstructing it intellectually. A 
spectacle, by definition, can never coincide with either the inwardness of 
consciousness or the opacity of the flesh. Still les s can it reconcile them. 
Once they have been dissociated, these two moments of the human 
reality are in opposition to each other; and as soon as we pursue one of 
them, the other disappears. If the subject inflicts excessively violent pain 
upon himself, his  mind becomes unhinged: he abdicates; he loses his 
sovereignty. Excessive vileness entails disgust, which interferes with 
pleasure. In practice, it is difficult to indulge in cruelty, except within 
very modest limits; and in theory, it implies a contradict ion which is expressed in the following two passages: “The most divine charms are as 
nothing when submission and obedience do not come forth to offer 
them,” and: “One must do violence to the object of one’s desire; when it 
surrenders, the pleasure is great er.” But where is one to find free slaves? 
One has to be satisfied with compromises. With paid and abjectly 
consenting prostitutes, Sade went somewhat beyond the limits that had 
been agreed upon. He allowed himself some violence against a wife who maintained a certain human dignity in her docility.  
But the ideal erotic act was never to be realized. This is the deeper 
meaning of the words Sade puts into the mouth of Jérôme: “What we are doing here is only the image of what we would like to do.” It was not 
merely that really heinous crimes were forbidden in practice, but that 
even those which one could summon up in the midst of the wildest 
ravings would disappoint their author: “Ah, how many times, by God, 
have I not longed to be able to assail the sun, snatch  it out of the 
universe, make a general darkness, or use that star to burn the world! oh, 
that would be a crime …” But if this dream seemed satisfying, it was 
because the criminal projected into it his own destruction along with 
that of the universe. Had he  survived, he would have been frustrated 
once again. Sadistic crime can never be adequate to its animating 
purpose. The victim is never more than a symbol; the subject possesses 
himself only as an imago, and their relationship is merely the parody of the d rama which would really set them at grips in their incommunicable 
intimacy. That is why the Bishop in The 120 Days of Sodom  “never 
committed a crime without immediately conceiving a second.”  
The moment of plotting the act is an exceptional moment for the 
libertine because he can then be unaware of the inevitable fact, namely, that reality will give him the lie. And if narration plays a primary role in sadistic orgies and easily awakens senses upon which flesh -and-blood 
objects cease to act, the reason is th at these objects can be wholly 
attained only by their absence. Actually, there is only one way of finding 
satisfaction in the phantoms created by debauchery, and that is to accede to their very unreality. In choosing eroticism, Sade chose the make -
believe.  It was only in the imaginary that Sade could live with any 
certitude and without risk of disappointment. He repeated the idea throughout his work. “The pleasure of the senses is always regulated in 
accordance with the imagination. Man can aspire to felicity only by 
serving all the whims of his imagination.” It was by means of his imagination that he escaped from space, time, prison, the police, the 
void of absence, opaque presences, the conflicts of existence, death, life, 
and all contradictions. It was not murder that fulfilled Sade’s erotic nature: it was literature.  
3 
It might seem, at first glance, that by writing Sade was merely 
reacting as many other prisoners do in the same situation. The idea was 
not completely new to him. One of the plays presented  at La Coste in 
1772 was doubtlessly written by him; and his strongbox, forced open by 
order of Madame de Montreuil, contained certain “leaflets,” probably 
notes on sex, in his own hand. Nevertheless, when he was imprisoned at 
Vincennes, he waited four yea rs before undertaking a real work. In 
another cell of the same fortress, Mirabeau, who was also groaning that 
he was “being buried alive in a tomb,” tried to divert himself by doing 
translations, writing an essay on the lettres de cachet,  and carrying on a  
pornographic correspondence. He was trying to kill time, to distract his 
weary body, and to undermine a hostile society. Sade was driven by similar motives; he set to work; and more than once, while composing 
his novels, he had to “whip himself up.” He also wanted to revenge 
himself on his torturers. He writes to his wife in a joyous rage: “ …you 
fancied you were sure to work wonders, I’ll wager, by reducing me to an 
atrocious abstinence in the article of carnal sin.  Well, you were wrong: 
you have produced a ferment in my brain, owing to you phantoms have arisen in me which I shall have to render real.”  
Although his decision may have been prompted by his confinement, 
nevertheless it had much deeper roots. Sade had always spun stories for himself around his d ebauches; and the reality which served as a frame of 
reference for his fantasies may have given them a certain density, yet it 
also cramped them by its resistance. The opacity of things blurs their 
significance, which is the very quality that words preserv e. Even a child 
is aware that crude drawings are more obscene than the organs and 
gestures which they represent, because the intention to defile is asserted 
in all its purity. Blasphemy is the easiest and surest of sacrilegious acts. Sade’s heroes talked o n and on indefatigably; and in the Rose Keller 
affair he indulged in endless speechifying. Writing is far more able than 
the spoken word to endow images with the solidity of a monument, and 
it resists all argument. Thanks to the written word, virtue mainta ins her 
dreary prestige even at the very moment when she is denounced as 
hypocrisy and stupidity. Crime remains criminal in its grandeur. Freedom may still throb in a dying body.  
Literature enabled Sade to unleash and fix his dreams, and also to 
transcend the contradictions implied by any demonic system. Better still, 
it is itself a demonic act, since it exhibits criminal visions in an aggressive 
way. That is what gives Sade’s work its incomparable value. Anyone 
misunderstands Sade who finds it paradoxical that a “solitary” should have engaged in such a passionate effort to communicate. He had 
nothing of the misanthrope who prefers the company of animals and 
virgin forests to his own kind. Cut off from others, he was haunted by 
their inaccessible presence. I f he craves for the presence of other persons 
at the most intimate moments of his life, it is normal that he wish to 
expose himself to the large public to which a book can aspire.  
Did he wish only to shock? In 1795 he wrote: “I am about to put 
forward some  major ideas; they will be heard and pondered. If not all of 
them please, surely a few will; in some sort, then, I shall have 
contributed to the progress of our age, and shall be content.”10 And in La 
Nouvelle Justine:  “To falsify such basic truths, regardl ess of their 
consequences, reveals a fundamental lack of concern for human beings.” After presiding over the Piques Section and drawing up speeches and petitions in society’s name, he must have liked, in his more optimistic 
moments, to think of himself as a spokesman for humanity. Of this 
experience he retained not the evil aspects, but those which were 
genuinely rewarding. These dreams quickly faded, but it would be too 
simple to consign Sade to satanism. His sincerity was inextricably bound 
up with dishonesty. He delighted in the shocking effects of truth; but if 
he set himself the duty of shocking, it was because in this way truth 
might be made manifest. While arrogantly admitting his errors, he 
declared himself in the right. He wished to transmit a message to the very public he was deliberately outraging. His writings reflect the 
ambivalence of his relation to the given world and to people.  
Even more surprising, perhaps, is the mode of expression he chose. 
We might expect a man who had so jealously cultiv ated his singularity to 
10 Philosophy in the Bedroom.                                           try to translate his experience into a singular form, as, for example, 
Lautréamont did. But the eighteenth century offered Sade few lyrical 
possibilities; he hated the mawkish sensibility which the time confused 
with poetry —the time  was not yet ripe for a poète maudit.  And Sade was 
in no way disposed to great literary audacity. A real creator should—at 
least on a certain level and at a given moment —free himself of the yoke 
of the given  and emerge beyond other men into complete solitude. But 
there was in Sade an inner weakness which was inadequately masked by 
his arrogance. Society was lodged in his heart in the guise of guilt. He 
had neither the means nor the time to reinvent man, the world, and himself. He was in too much of a hurry,  in a hurry to defend himself. I 
have already said that he sought in writing to gain a clear conscience; and in order to do this, he had to compel people to absolve him, even to approve him. Instead of affirming himself, Sade argued; and in order to 
make h imself understood, he borrowed the literary forms and the tried 
and tested doctrines of contemporary society. As the product of a 
rational age, no arm seemed surer to him than reason. He who wrote: 
“All universal moral principles are idle fancies,” submitt ed docilely to 
general esthetic conventions and contemporary claims for the 
universality of logic. This explains both his art and his thought. Though he justified himself, he was always trying to excuse himself. His work is 
an ambiguous effort to push crim e to the extreme while wiping away his 
guilt.  
It is both natural and striking that Sade’s favorite form was parody. 
He did not try to set up a new universe. He contented himself with 
ridiculing, by the manner in which he imitated it, the one imposed upon 
him. He pretended to believe in the vain fancies that inhabited it: 
innocence, kindness, devotion, generosity, and chastity. When he unctuously depicted virtue in Aline et Valcour,  in Justine,  or in Les Crimes 
de l’Amour,  he was not being merely prudent. Th e “veils” in which he 
swathed Justine were more than a literary device. In order to derive 
amusement from harassing virtue, one must credit it with a certain reality. Defending his tales against the charge of immorality, Sade 
hypocritically wrote: “Who can  flatter himself that he has put virtue in a 
favorable light if the features of the vice surrounding it are not strongly 
emphasized?” But he meant the very opposite: how is vice to be made 
thrilling if the reader is not first taken in by the illusion of good? Fooling 
people is even more delicious than shocking them. And Sade, in spinning his sugary, roundabout phrases, tasted the keen pleasures of 
mystification. Unfortunately, he generally amuses himself more than he 
does us. His style has often the same co ldness and the same 
mawkishness as the edifying tales he transposed, and the episodes unfold 
in accordance with equally dreary conventions.  
Nevertheless, it was through parody that Sade obtained his most 
brilliant artistic successes. As Maurice Heine point s out, Sade was the 
precursor of the novel of horror, but he was too deeply rationalistic to 
lose himself in fantasy. When he abandons himself to the extravagances 
of his imagination, one does not know which to admire the most, his 
epic vehemence or his irony. The wonder is that the irony is subtle 
enough to redeem his ravings: what it does is lend a dry, poetic quality which saves them from incredibility. This somber humor which can, at 
times, turn on itself, is more than a mere technique. With his shame a nd 
pride, his truth and crime, Sade was the very spirit of contentiousness. It 
is when he plays the buffoon that he is really most serious, and when he 
is most outrageously dishonest that he is most sincere. His extravagance 
often masks ingenuous truths wh ile he launches the most flagrant enormities in the form of sober and deliberate arguments; he uses all 
kinds of tricks to avoid being pinned down; and that is how he attains 
his end, which is to disturb us. His very form tends to disconcert us. He 
speaks in a monotonous, embarrassed tone, and we begin to be bored, 
when all at once the dull grayness is lit up with the glaring brilliance of 
some bitter, sardonic truth. It is then that Sade’s style, in its gaiety, its 
violence, and its arrogant rawness, prove s to be that of a great writer.  
Nevertheless, no one would think of ranking Justine  with Manon 
Lescaut  or Les Liaisons dangereuses.  It was, paradoxically, the very 
necessity of Sade’s work which imposed upon it its esthetic limits. He did not have the pers pective essential to an artist. He lacked the 
detachment necessary to confront reality and re -create it. He did not 
confront himself; he contented himself with projecting his fantasies. His accounts have the unreality, the false precision, and the monotony  of 
schizophrenic reveries. He relates them for his own pleasure, and he is unconcerned about imposing them upon the reader. We do not feel in them the stubborn resistance of the real world or the more poignant 
resistance that Sade encountered in the depth s of his own heart. Caves, 
underground passageways, mysterious castles, all the props of the Gothic 
novel take on a particular meaning in his work. They symbolize the isolation of the image. Perception echoes data’s totality and, 
consequently, the obstacle s which the data contain. The image is 
perfectly submissive and pliant. We find in it only what we put into it. 
The image is the enchanted domain from which no power whatever can 
expel the solitary despot. It is the image that Sade was imitating, even 
while claiming to give it literary opacity. Thus, he disregarded the spatial 
and temporal coordinates within which all real events are situated. The 
places he evokes are not of this world, the events which occur in them are tableaux vivants  rather than adventu res, and time has no hold on 
Sade’s universe. There is no future either for or in his work.  
Not only do the orgies to which he invites us take place in no 
particular time or locality, but —what is more serious —no living people 
are brought into play. The vic tims are frozen in their tearful abjection, 
and the torturers in their frenzies. Instead of giving them lifelike density, 
Sade merely daydreams about them. Remorse and disgust are unknown to them; at most they have occasional feelings of satiety. They kill with 
indifference; they are abstract incarnations of evil. But unless eroticism has some social, familiar, or human basis, it ceases to be in any way extraordinary. It is no longer a conflict, a revelation, or an exceptional 
experience. It no longer revea ls any dramatic relationship between 
individuals but reverts to biological crudity. How is one to feel the 
opposition of others’ freedoms or the spirit’s descent into the flesh, if all 
we see is a display of voluptuous or tortured flesh? Horror itself pete rs 
out in these excesses at which no consciousness is actually present. If a 
story like Poe’s “The Pit and the Pendulum” is so full of anguish, it is 
because we grasp the situation from within the subject; we see Sade’s 
heroes only from without. They are a s artificial and move in a world as 
arbitrary as that of Florian’s shepherds. That is why these perverse 
bucolics have the austerity of a nudist colony.  
The debauches which Sade describes in such great detail 
systematically exhaust the anatomical possibili ties of the human body 
rather than reveal uncommon emotional complexes. Nevertheless, 
though he failed to endow them with esthetic truth, Sade adumbrated 
forms of sexual behavior unknown until then, particularly those which 
unite mother -hatred, frigidity, intellectuality, “passive sodomy,” and 
cruelty. No one has emphasized with more vigor the link between the imagination and what we call vice; and he gives us, from time to time, 
insights of surprising depth into the relation of sexuality to existence.  
Are we, then, to admire him as a real innovator in psychology? It is 
difficult to decide. Forerunners are always credited with either too much or too little. How is one to measure the value of a truth which, to use 
Hegel’s term, has not become?  An idea derives  its value from the 
experience it sums up and the methods it initiates. But we hardly know 
what credit to give a new and attractive formulation if it is not confirmed 
by subsequent developments. We are tempted either to magnify it with 
all the significance  that it acquires later on or else to minimize its scope. 
Hence, in the case of Sade, the impartial reader hesitates. Often, as we 
turn a page, we come upon an unexpected phrase which seems to open 
up new paths, only to find that the thinking stops short. Instead of a vivid and individual voice, all one hears is the droning drivel of Holbach 
and La Mettrie.  
It is remarkable, for example, that in 1795
11 Sade wrote: “Sexual 
pleasure is, I agree, a passion to which all others are subordinate but in 
which they all unite.” Not only does Sade, in the first part of this text, 
anticipate what has been called the “pansexuality” of Freud, but he 
makes of eroticism the mainspring of human behavior. In addition, he 
asserts, in the second part, that sexuality is charged w ith a significance 
that goes beyond it. Libido is everywhere, and it is always far more than 
itself. Sade certainly anticipated this great truth. He knew that the 
“perversions” that are vulgarly regarded as moral monstrosities or 
physiological defects actu ally envelop what would now be called an 
intentionality. He writes to his wife that all “fancy …derives from a 
11 Ibid.                                          principle of delicacy,” and in Aline et Valcour  he declares that 
“refinements come only from delicacy; one may, therefore, have a great 
deal of de licacy, though one may be moved by things which seem to 
exclude it.” He understood, too, that our tastes are motivated not by the 
intrinsic qualities of the object but by the latter’s relationship with the 
subject. In a passage in La Nouvelle Justine  he tries to explain 
coprophilia. His reply is faltering, but clumsily using the notion of 
imagination, he points out that the truth of a thing lies not in what it is 
but in the meaning it has taken on for us in the course of our individual 
experience. Intuitions such as these allow us to hail Sade as a precursor of psychoanalysis.  
Unfortunately, he reduces their value when he insists upon harping, 
like Holbach, on the principles of psycho- physiological parallelism. 
“With the perfecting of the science of anatomy,  we shall easily be able to 
show the relationship between man’s constitution and the tastes which have affected him.” The contradiction is glaring in the striking passage in The 120 Days of Sodom  where he considers the sexual attraction of 
ugliness. “It ha s, moreover, been proved that horror, nastiness, and the 
frightful are what give pleasure when one fornicates. Beauty is a simple 
thing; ugliness is the exceptional thing. And fiery imaginations, no 
doubt, always prefer the extraordinary thing to the simpl e thing.” One 
might wish that Sade had defined this link between horror and desire 
which he indicates only confusedly; but he stops abruptly with a 
condition that cancels the question that has been posed: “All these 
things depend upon our structures and or gans and on the manner in 
which they affect one another, and we are no more able to change our 
tastes for these things than to vary the shapes of our bodies.”  At first glance, it seems paradoxical that this man who was so self -
centered should have given su ch prominence to theories which deny any 
significance to individual peculiarities. He asks that we make a great 
effort to understand the human heart better. He tries to explore its strangest aspects. He cries out: “What an enigma is man!” He boasts: 
“You k now that no one analyzes things as I do,” and yet he follows La 
Mettrie in lumping man together with the machine and the plant and 
simply does away with psychology. But this antinomy, disconcerting 
though it may be, is easily explained. It is probably not so easy to be a 
monster as some people seem to think. Sade, though fascinated by his 
own personal mystery, was also frightened by it. Instead of expressing 
himself, he wanted to defend himself. The words he puts into Blamont’s 
mouth
12 are a confession: “I h ave supported my deviations with reasons; 
I did not stop at mere doubt; I have vanquished, I have uprooted, I have 
destroyed everything in my heart that might have interfered with my 
pleasures.” The first of these tasks of liberation was, as he repeated 
countless times, to triumph over remorse. And as for repudiating all 
feelings of guilt, what doctrine could be surer than that which undermines the very idea of responsibility? But it would be a big mistake to try to confine him to such a notion: if he seeks  support in 
determinism, he does so, like many others, in order to lay claim to freedom.  
From a literary point of view, the commonplace -ridden speeches with 
which he intersperses his debauches finally rob them of all life and all verisimilitude. Here, too,  it is not so much the reader to whom Sade is 
talking, but himself. His wearisome repetitions are tantamount to a 
12 Aline et Valcour.                                           purification rite whose repetition is as natural to him as regular 
confession is to a good Catholic. Sade does not give us the work of a free 
man. He makes us participate in his efforts of liberation. But it is 
precisely for this reason that he holds our attention. His endeavor is more genuine than the instruments it employs. Had Sade been satisfied 
with the determinism he professed, he would ha ve repudiated all his 
moral anxieties. But these asserted themselves with a clarity that no logic 
could obscure. Over and above the facile excuses which he sets forth so 
tediously, he persists in questioning himself, in attacking. It is owing to 
this heads trong sincerity that, though not a consummate artist or a 
coherent philosopher, he deserves to be hailed as a great moralist.  
4 
“Extreme in everything,” Sade could not adapt himself to the deist 
compromises of his time. It was with a declaration of atheism , Dialogue 
between a Priest and a Dying Man, that in 1782 he launched his work. 
The existence of God had been denied more than once since the appearance in 1729 of Le Testament du curé de Meslier.  Rousseau had 
dared to present a sympathetic atheist, Monsie ur de Wolmar, in La 
Nouvelle Héloïse.  In spite of this, the Abbé Mélégan had been thrown 
into prison in 1754 for having written Zoroastre; and La Mettrie was 
obliged to take refuge at the court of Frederick II. The atheism vehemently espoused by Sylvain Maréchal and popularized by Holbach’s Le Système de la Nature in 1770 and by the satires collected under the 
title Recueil philosophique,  was none the less a dangerous doctrine in an 
age which placed the scaffold itself under the aegis of the Supreme Being. Sade, in parading his atheism, was deliberately committing a 
provocative act. But it was also an act of sincerity. I feel that Klossowski, despite the interest of his study, is misinterpreting Sade in taking his 
passionate rejection of God for an avowal of need. The sophism which 
maintains that to attack God is to affirm Him finds a great deal of support these days, but this notion is actually the invention of those to whom atheism is a challenge. Sade expressed himself clearly on the 
matter when he wrote: “The idea of God is the sole wrong for which I 
cannot forgive mankind.”  
And if this is the first mystification he attacks, it is because he 
proceeds, like a good Cartesian, from the simple to the complex, from the gross lie to the more misleading error. He knows that in order to free 
the individual from the idols to which society has bound him, one must 
begin by insuring his independence in the face of heaven. If man had not 
been terrorized by the great bugbear to which he stupidly pays worship, he would not so easily have surrendered his freedom and truth. In 
choosing God, he denied himself, and that was his unpardonable 
offense. Actually, he is responsible to no transcendent judge; there is no heavenly court of appeal.  
Sade was not unaware of the extent to which the belief in hell and 
eternity might inflame cruelty. Saint -Fond toys with such hopes so as to 
extract pleasure from the limitless suffering of the damned. He diverts 
himself by imagining a diabolical demiurge who would embody the 
diffuse evil of N ature. But not for one instant did Sade consider these 
hypotheses as anything more than intellectual pastimes. He is not to be 
recognized in the characters who express them, and he refutes them 
through his mouthpieces. In evoking absolute crime, his aim is  to ravage 
Nature and not to wound God. His harangues against religion are open 
to reproach because of the tedious monotony with which they repeat 
timeworn commonplaces; but Sade gives them still another personal turn when, anticipating Nietzsche, he denounces in Christianity a religion of 
victims which ought, in his view, to be replaced by an ideology of force. 
His honesty, in any case, is unquestionable. Sade’s nature was thoroughly 
irreligious. There is no trace of metaphysical anxiety in him; he is too concerned with justifying his existence to speculate on its meaning and 
purpose. His convictions on the subject were wholehearted. If he served 
at mass and flattered a bishop, it was because, old and broken, he had chosen hypocrisy. But his testament is un equivocal. He feared death for 
the same reason that he feared senility: as the dissolution of his individuality; fear of the world beyond the grave is wholly lacking in his work. The fear of the beyond never appears in his work. Sade wished to 
deal only wi th men, and everything that was not human was foreign to 
him. 
And yet he was alone among men. The eighteenth century, insofar as 
it tried to abolish God’s reign upon earth, substituted another idol in its 
place. Atheists and deists united in the worship of the new incarnation 
of the Supreme Good: Nature. They had no intention of forgoing the 
conveniences of a categorical, universal morality. Transcendental values 
had broken down; pleasure was acknowledged as the measure of good; 
and through this hedonism, s elf-love was reinstated. For example, 
Madame du Ch âtelet wrote: “We must begin by saying to ourselves that 
we have nothing else to do in this world but seek pleasant sensations and 
feelings.” But these timid egotists postulated a natural order which 
assure d the harmonious agreement of individual interests with the 
general interest. A reasonable organization, obtained by pact or contract, 
would suffice to insure the prosperity of society for the benefit of all and 
each. Sade’s tragic life gave the lie to thi s optimistic religion.  The eighteenth century often painted love in somber, solemn, and 
even tragic tones; and Richardson, Prévost, Duclos, and Crébillon, 
whom Sade quotes with respect, and, above all, Laclos, whom Sade 
claimed not to know, created more or  less satanic heroes. But their 
wickedness always has its source, not in spontaneity, but in a perversion 
of their minds or wills. Genuine eroticism, on the contrary, because of its 
instinctive character, is reinstated. Natural, healthy, and useful to the species, sexual desire merges, according to Diderot, with the very 
movement of life, and the passions it brings are likewise good and 
fruitful. If the characters in La Religieuse  take pleasure in “sadistic” 
viciousness, it is because instead of satisfying their appetites they repress 
them. Rousseau, whose sexual experience was complex and largely 
unhappy, also expresses this in edifying terms: “Sweet pleasures, pure, vivid, painless, and unalloyed.” And also: “Love, as I see it, as I have felt 
it, grows ard ent before the illusory image of the beloved’s perfection, and 
this very illusion leads it to enthusiasm for virtue. For this idea always 
enters into that of the perfect woman.”
13 Even in Restif de la Bretonne, 
though pleasure may have a stormy character, i t is none the less rapture, 
languor, and tenderness. Sade was the only one to reveal selfishness, 
tyranny, and crime in sexuality. This would suffice to give him a unique 
place in the history of the sensibility of his century, but from this insight 
he deri ved even more remarkable ethical consequences.  
13 Cf. Sade: “ … it is horror, villainy, the appalling which pleases; well, where are they 
more emphatically present than in a vitiated object? if ’tis the filthy thing which 
pleases in the lubricious ac t, then certainly the more filthy the thing, the more it 
should please, and it is surely much filthier in the corrupted than in the intact and 
perfect object.”                                           There was nothing new in the idea that Nature is evil. Hobbes, with 
whom Sade was familiar and whom he quotes freely, had declared that 
man is a wolf to man and that the state of Nature is one of war. A long 
line of English moralists and satirists had followed in his steps, among them Swift, whom Sade used and even copied. In France, Vauvenargues 
continued the puritan and Jansenist development of the Christian 
tradition which identifies the flesh with original sin. Bayle and, more brilliantly, Buffon, established the fact that Nature is not wholly good; 
and though the myth of the Noble Savage had been current since the 
sixteenth century, particularly in Diderot and the Encyclopedists, Emeric de Crucé had already  attacked it at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century. Sade had no trouble finding any number of arguments to support the thesis which was implied in his erotic experience and which was ironically confirmed by society’s imprisoning 
him for having followe d his instincts. But what distinguishes him from 
his predecessors is the fact that they, after exposing the evil of Nature, 
set up, in opposition to it, a morality which derived from God and 
society; whereas Sade, though rejecting the first part of the generally 
accepted credo: “Nature is Good; let us follow her,” paradoxically 
retained the second. Nature’s example has an imperative value, even 
though her law be one of hate and destruction. We must now examine 
more closely the ruse whereby he turned the new  cult against its 
devotees.  
Sade conceived the relation of man to Nature in various ways. These 
variations seem to me not so much the movements of a dialectic as the 
expressions of the hesitation of a thinking that at times restrains its 
boldness and at ot hers breaks completely loose. When Sade is merely 
trying to find hasty justifications, he adopts a mechanistic view of the world. La Mettrie affirmed the moral indifference of human acts when 
he declared: “We are no guiltier in following the primitive impulses that 
govern us than is the Nile for her floods or the sea for her waves.” 
Similarly, Sade, in order to excuse himself, compares himself to plants, animals, and the elements. “In her hands I am only a tool that she 
[Nature] manipulates as she pleases.”  Although he constantly took 
refuge in similar statements, they do not express his real thoughts. In the 
first place, Nature, for him, is not an indifferent mechanism. There is 
such significance in her transformations that one might play with the 
idea that  she is governed by an evil genius. Nature is actually cruel and 
voracious, informed with the spirit of destruction. She “would desire the 
utter annihilation of all living creatures so as to enjoy her power of re -
creating new ones.” However, man is not her  slave. 
Sade had already pointed out in Aline et Valcour  that he can wrest 
himself free and turn against her. “Let us dare do violence to this 
unintelligible Nature, the better to master the art of enjoying her.” And he declared even more decisively in Jul iette: “Once man is created, he is 
no longer dependent upon Nature; once Nature has launched him, she 
has no further hold on him.” He goes further. Man, in his relation to 
Nature, is comparable to “the froth, the vapor which rises from the 
rarefied liquid in a heated vessel. The vapor is not created; it is a 
resultant; it is heterogeneous. It derives its existence from a foreign 
element. It can exist or not, without detriment to the element from 
which it issues. It owes nothing to the element and the element owes 
nothing to it.” Though man is of no more value to the universe than a 
bit of froth, it is this very insignificance which guarantees his autonomy. 
The natural order cannot control him since he is radically alien to it. 
Hence, he may make a moral deci sion, and no one has the right to dictate to him. Why then, with all the paths open to him, did Sade 
choose the one which led, through the imitation of Nature, to crime? To 
answer this question, we must understand his system in its totality; the 
aim of this system was precisely to justify the “crimes” which Sade never dreamed of renouncing.  
We are always more influenced than we realize by the ideas we 
contest. To be sure, Sade often uses naturalism as an ad hominem  
argument. He took sly pleasure in turning to evil account the examples 
which his contemporaries tried to exploit on behalf of Good, but no doubt he also took for granted that might makes right. When he tries to demonstrate the fact that the libertine has the right to oppress women, 
he exclaims: “H as not Nature proved, in giving us the strength necessary 
to submit them to our desires, that we have the right to do so?” One 
could find many similar quotations. “Nature has made us all equal at 
birth, Sophie,” says la Dubois to Justine. “If Nature wishes  to disturb this 
first stage of general laws, it is for us to correct her caprices.” Sade’s basic 
charge against the codes imposed by society is that they are artificial. He 
compares them, in a particularly significant text, to those that might be 
drawn up  by a community of blind men.
14 “All those duties are 
imaginary, since they are only conventional. In like manner, man has 
made laws relative to his petty knowledge, his petty wiles, and his petty 
needs —but all this has no reality…. When we look at Nature w e readily 
understand that everything we decide and organize is as far removed 
from the perfection of her views and as inferior to her as the laws of the 
society of blind men would be to our own.”  
14 Pensée cited in Maurice Heine:  Le Marquis de Sade,  Paris, Gallimard, 1950.                                           Montesquieu had advanced the idea that laws were dependent o n 
climate, circumstances, and even the arrangement of the “fibers” of our 
bodies. It might be concluded that they express the various aspects 
assumed by Nature in time and space. But the indefatigable Sade takes us to Tahiti, Patagonia, and the antipodes, to show us that the diversity 
of enacted laws definitively negates their value. Though they may be 
related, they seem to him arbitrary. And it should be noted that for him the words “conventional” and “imaginary” are synonymous. Nature 
retains her sacred c haracter for Sade: indivisible and unique, she is an 
absolute, outside of which there is no reality.  
It is obvious that Sade’s thinking on this point was not quite coherent, 
that it was not at all times equally sincere, and that it was constantly 
developin g. But his inconsistencies are not quite so obvious as one might 
think. The syllogism: Nature is evil, and therefore the society that 
departs from Nature merits our obedience, is far too simple. In the first 
place, society is suspect because of its hypocri sy. It appeals to Nature’s 
authority even though it is really hostile to her. And besides, society is 
rooted in Nature, despite its antagonism to her. Society manifests its 
original perversion by the very way in which it contradicts Nature. The 
idea of general interest has no natural basis. “The interests of individuals 
are almost always opposed to those of society.” But the idea was invented 
in order to satisfy a natural instinct, namely, the tyrannical will of the 
strong. Laws, instead of correcting the p rimitive order of the world, only 
aggravate its injustice. “We are all alike, except in strength,” that is, there are no essential differences among individuals, and the unequal 
distribution of strength might have been offset. Instead, the strong have 
arrogated to themselves all the forms of superiority and have even 
invented others.  Holbach, and many others along with him, had exposed the hypocrisy 
of codes whose sole purpose was to oppress the weak. Morelly and 
Brissot, among others, had shown that the ownership of property has no 
natural basis. Society has fabricated this harmful institution out of whole cloth. “There is no exclusive ownership in Nature,” wrote Brissot. “The 
word has been struck from her code. The unhappy starveling may carry 
off and devour his bread because he is hungry. His claim is his hunger.” In Philosophy in the Bedroom  Sade uses almost the same terms to demand 
that the idea of pleasure be substituted for that of proprietorship. How can proprietorship claim to be a universally recognized right when the poor rebel against it and the rich dream only of increasing it by further 
monopolizing? “It is by complete equality of wealth and condition and 
not by vain laws that the power of the stronger must be weakened.” But the fact is that it i s the strong who make the laws for their own profit.  
Their presumptuousness is odiously apparent in their arrogation of the 
right to inflict punishment. Beccaria had maintained that the aim of punishment was to procure redress, but that no one could claim the right 
to punish. Sade indignantly spoke out against all penalties of an 
expiatory character. “O slaughterers, jailers, and imbeciles of all regimes 
and governments, when will you come to prefer the science of 
understanding man to that of imprisoning and killing him?” He rebels 
particularly against the death penalty. Society tries to justify it by the lex 
talionis,  but this is just another fantasy without roots in reality. In the 
first place, there is no reciprocity among the subjects; their existences a re 
not commensurable. Nor is there any similarity between a murder 
committed in a burst of passion or out of need, and coldly premeditated 
assassination by judges. And how can the latter in any way compensate 
for the former? In erecting scaffolds, society,  far from mitigating the cruelty of Nature, merely aggravates it. Actually, it resists evil by doing 
greater evil. Its claim on our loyalty is without foundation.  
The famous contract invoked by Hobbes and Rousseau is merely a 
myth; how could individual fre edom be recognized in an order that 
oppresses it? This pact is to the interest of neither the strong, who have 
nothing to gain in abdicating their privileges, nor the weak, whose 
inferiority is thereby confirmed. There can be only a state of war between th ese two groups; and each has its own values, which are 
irreconcilable with those of the other. “When he took a hundred louis  
from a man’s pocket, he was committing what was for him a just act, though the man who had been robbed must have regarded it quite 
otherwise.” In the speech which he puts into the mouth of Coeur -de-fer, 
Sade passionately exposes the bourgeois hoax which consists in erecting 
class interests into universal principles. Since the concrete conditions 
under which individuals live are not homogeneous, no universal morality 
is possible.  
But should we not try to reform society, since it has betrayed its own 
aspirations? Cannot individual freedom be put precisely to this use? It 
seems not improbable that Sade may at times have envisaged this 
solution. It is significant that in Aline et Valcour  he describes with equal 
indulgence the anarchic society of cannibals and the communistic society 
of Zamé in which evil is disarmed by justice. I do not think that there is any irony at all in the latter pic ture, any more than in the appeal, “Yet 
Another Effort, Frenchmen …” inserted into Philosophy in the Bedroom .
15 
15 It has been maint ained that Sade does not endorse this statement since he puts it 
into the mouth of Le Chevalier. Le Chevalier, however, merely reads a text of which 
Dolmancé, Sade’s mouthpiece, admits he is the author.                                           Sade’s activity during the Revolution clearly proves that he wished to be 
integrated into a collectivity. He suffered bitterly from the ostracism to 
which he was subjected.  
He dreamed of an ideal society from which his special tastes would 
not exclude him. He really thought that such tastes would not constitute 
a serious danger to an enlightened society. Zamé assures us that he 
would not be disturbe d by Sade’s disciples: “The people you speak of are 
few; they do not worry me at all.” And Sade, in a letter, maintains: “It is 
not the opinions or vices of private individuals that are harmful to the 
State, but rather the behavior of public figures.” The fact is that the libertine’s acts have no real influence; they are not much more than 
games. Sade takes refuge behind their insignificance and goes so far as to 
suggest that he would be ready to sacrifice them. Motivated as they are by defiance and resentm ent, these acts would lose their significance in a 
world without hatred. If the prohibitions which make crime attractive were abolished, lust itself would be eliminated. Perhaps Sade really longed for the personal conversion that would result from the conv ersion 
of other men. He probably expected, also, that his vices would be 
accepted as something exceptional by a community which respected 
singularity and which would, therefore, recognize him as an exception. 
He was sure, in any case, that a man who was content with whipping a 
prostitute every now and then was less harmful to society than a farmer -
general.  
The real plagues are established injustice, official abuses, and 
constitutional crimes; and these are the inevitable accompaniments of 
abstract laws whic h try to impose themselves uniformly upon a plurality 
of radically separate objects. A just economic order would render codes 
and courts useless, for crime is born of need and illegality and would vanish with the elimination of these grounds. The ideal reg ime, for 
Sade, was a kind of reasonable anarchy: “The rule of law is inferior to 
that of anarchy: the most obvious proof of what I assert is the fact that 
any government is obliged to plunge itself into anarchy whenever it aspires to remake its constitution. In order to abrogate its former laws, it 
is compelled to establish a revolutionary regime in which there is no law: 
this regime finally gives birth to new laws, but this second state is necessarily less pure than the first, since it derives from it.” Th is 
argument probably does not sound very convincing, but what Sade understood remarkably well was that the ideology of his time was merely the expression of an economic system and that a concrete transformation 
of this system would put an end to the humbug  of bourgeois morality. 
Very few of his contemporaries developed such penetrating views in such 
an extreme way.  
Nevertheless, Sade did not definitely take the path of social reform. 
His life and work were not guided by these utopian reveries. How could he have continued to believe in them very long in the depths of his 
dungeon cells or after the Terror? Events confirmed his private 
experience. Society’s failure was no mere accident. And besides, it was 
obvious that his interest in its possible success was of a purely speculative 
nature. He was obsessed by his own case. He cared little about changing 
himself and much more about being confirmed in his choices. His vices condemned him to solitude. He was to demonstrate the necessity of 
solitude and the supremac y of evil. It was easy for him to be honest 
because, maladjusted aristocrat that he was, he had never encountered 
men like himself. Though he mistrusted generalizations, he ascribed to 
his situation the value of a metaphysical inevitability: “Man is isolat ed in 
the world.” “All creatures are born isolated and have no need of one another.” If the diversity of human beings could be assimilated —as Sade 
himself frequently suggests —to that which differentiates plants or 
animals, a reasonable society would manage  to surmount it. It would be 
enough merely to respect each one’s particularity.  
But man does not merely endure his solitude; he demands it against 
everyone.  It follows that there is a heterogeneity of values, not only from 
class to class, but from individual to individual. “All passions have two 
meanings, Juliette: one, which is very unjust as regards the victim; the 
other, which is singularly just to the person who exercises it. And this 
fundamental antagonism cannot be transcended because it is the truth itself.” If human projects tried to reconcile themselves in a common 
quest for the general interest, they would be necessarily unauthentic. For 
there is no reality other than that of the self -enclosed subject hostile to 
any other subject which disputes its  sovereignty. The thing that prevents 
individual freedom from choosing Good is that the latter does not exist in the empty heaven or on the unjust earth, or even at some ideal horizon; it is nowhere to be found. Evil is an absolute resisted only by 
fanciful notions, and there is only one way of asserting oneself in the face 
of it: to assent to it.  
For there is one idea that Sade, throughout his pessimism, savagely 
rejects: the idea of submission. And that is why he detests the 
hypocritical resignation which  is adorned with the name of virtue. It is a 
stupid submission to the rule of evil, as re -created by society. In 
submitting, man renounces both his authenticity and his freedom. It was easy for Sade to show that chastity and temperance are not even justifi ed 
by their usefulness. The prejudices that condemn incest, sodomy, and all 
sexual “vagaries” have but one aim: to destroy the individual by imposing 
upon him a stupid conformism. But the great virtues extolled by the age had a deeper meaning; they tried t o palliate the all too obvious 
inadequacies of the law. Sade raised no objection to tolerance, probably 
because, so far as he could observe, no one even tried to practice it; but 
he did attack fanatically what is called humaneness and benevolence. These we re mystifications which aimed at reconciling the irreconcilable: 
the unsatisfied appetites of the poor and the selfish greed of the rich. Taking up the tradition of La Rochefoucauld, he shows that these are merely masks to disguise self -interest.  
The weak,  in order to check the arrogance of the strong, have 
invented the idea of fraternity, an idea which has no solid basis: “Now I beg of you to tell me whether I must love a human being simply because 
he exists or resembles me and whether for these reasons al one I must 
suddenly prefer him to myself?” What hypocrisy on the part of privileged 
persons who make a great to -do about their philanthropy and at the 
same time acquiesce in the abject condition of the poor! This false sentimentality was so widespread at t he time that even Valmont, in Les 
Liaisons dangereuses,  was moved to tears when he performed an act of 
charity; and it was obviously the currency of this mode of feeling that 
made Sade unleash all his dishonesty and sincerity against benevolence. 
He is certainly joking when he claims that in maltreating prostitutes he 
is serving the cause of morality. If libertines were permitted to molest 
them with impunity, prostitution would become so dangerous a profession that no one would engage in it. But he is quite  right in 
cutting through sophisms and exposing the inconsistencies of a society that protects the very things it condemns, and which, though permitting 
debauchery, often pillories the debauchee.  
He reveals the dangers of almsgiving with the same somber ir ony. If 
the poor are not reduced to hopelessness, they may rebel; and the safest thing would be to exterminate all of them. In this scheme, which he 
attributes to Saint -Fond, Sade develops the idea in Swift’s famous 
pamphlet, and he certainly does not iden tify himself with his hero. 
Nevertheless, the cynicism of this aristocrat, who fully espoused the interests of his class, is more valid to him than the compromises of 
guilty -minded hedonists. His thinking is clear —either do away with the 
poor or do away with poverty, but do not use half -measures and thus 
perpetuate injustice and oppression,
16 and above all do not pretend to be 
redeeming these extortions by handing out a trivial dole to those you 
exploit. If Sade’s heroes let some poor wretch die of hunger ra ther than 
defile themselves by an act of charity that would cost them nothing, it is 
because they passionately refuse any complicity with respectable people 
who appease their consciences so cheaply.  
Virtue deserves no admiration and no gratitude since, far  from 
reflecting the demands of a transcendent good, it serves the interests of 
those who make a show of it. It is only logical that Sade should come to 
this conclusion. But after all, if self- interest is the individual’s sole law, 
why despise it? In what respect is it inferior to vice? Sade answered this 
question often and vehemently. In cases where virtue is chosen, he says: “What lack of movement! What ice! Nothing stirs me, nothing excites 
me…. I ask you, is this pleasure? What a difference on the other  side! 
What tickling of my senses! What excitement in my organs!” And again: 
“Happiness lies only in that which excites, and the only thing that 
excites is crime.” In terms of the hedonism of his time, this argument 
16 This policy of all or nothing is found among presen t-day Communists. They 
repudiate bourgeois charity; and there are many who, on principle, refuse any private 
help to the needy.                                           carries weight. The only objection one m ight make is that Sade 
generalizes from his own individual case. May some people not also be 
excited by Good? He rejects this eclecticism. Virtue can procure only an 
imaginary happiness;  “true felicity lies only in the senses, and virtue 
gratifies none of them.” This statement may seem surprising, since Sade 
had actually made the imagination the mainspring of vice; but vice 
teaches us a certain truth through the very fantasies on which it feeds, and the proof is that it ends in orgasm, that is, in a definit e sensation; 
whereas the illusions on which virtue feeds are never concretely recouped by the individual. According to the philosophy that Sade borrowed from his age, sensation is the only measure of reality, and if virtue arouses no 
sensation, it is because it has no real basis.  
Sade explains what he means more clearly in the following parallel 
between virtue and vice: “ …the first is illusory, a fiction; the second is 
authentic, real; the first is founded upon vile prejudices, the second upon 
reason; the f irst, through the agency of pride, the most false of all our 
sensations, may provide the heart with a brief instant’s titillation; the 
other is a veritable mental pleasure -taking, and it inflames every other 
passion…” Virtue, chimerical and imaginary, encl oses us in a world of 
appearances; whereas vice’s intimate link with the flesh guarantees its genuineness. Using the vocabulary of Stirner, whose name has rightly 
been linked with Sade’s, we might say that virtue alienates the individual from that empty en tity, Man. It is only in crime that he justifies and 
fulfills himself as a concrete ego. If the poor man resigns himself or vainly tries to fight for his fellows, he is maneuvered and duped, an inert 
object, a plaything of Nature; he is nothing. He must, l ike la Dubois or 
Coeur -de-fer, try to pass over to the side of the strong. The rich person 
who accepts his privileges passively also exists like an object. If he abuses his power and becomes a tyrant, then he is someone. Instead of losing 
himself in philanthropic dreams, he will cynically take advantage of the 
injustice that favors him. “Where would be the victims of our villainy if 
all men were criminals? We must never cease to keep the people tied to the yoke of error and the lie,” says Esterval.  
Are we b ack to the idea that man can only act in obedience to his evil 
nature? Is he not destroying his freedom with the pretext of safeguarding his authenticity? No, for though freedom may be unable to go counter to 
given reality, it is able to wrest itself away from it and assume it. This 
procedure is similar to Stoic conversion which, by deliberate decision, turns reality to its own account. There is no contradiction in Sade’s 
extolling crime and at the same time getting indignant about men’s 
injustice, selfishn ess, and cruelty.
17 He has only contempt for the timid 
vice, for the rash crimes which merely reflect passively the heinousness of 
Nature. One must make oneself  a criminal in order to avoid being evil, as 
is a volcano or a member of the police. It is not a matter of submitting to 
the universe, but of imitating it in open defiance.  
This is the attitude that Almani, the chemist, assumes at the edge of 
Mount Etna. “Yes, my friend, yes, I abhor Nature. And the reason I loathe her is that I know her all too well.  Knowing her dreadful secrets, I 
felt a kind of ineffable pleasure in copying her heinousness. I shall 
imitate her, though I hate her …. Her murderous nets are spread for us 
alone. Let us try to catch her in her own trap …. In presenting to me 
only her effec ts, she concealed all her causes. I am therefore limited to 
imitating the former. Unable to guess the motive that put the dagger 
17 The similarity with Stirner at this point is striking. Stirner also condemns “vulgar” 
crime and extols only that which makes f or the fulfillment of the ego.                                           into her hands, I have been able to take away her weapon and use it as 
she did.” This text has the same ambiguous ring as the w ords of 
Dolmancé: “ ’Twas  men’s ingratitude dried out my heart.” It reminds us 
that it was in despair and resentment that Sade devoted himself to evil. And it is in this respect that his hero is distinguished from the ancient 
sage. He does not follow Nature  lovingly and joyously. He copies her 
with abhorrence and without understanding her. And he wills himself to 
be something without approving himself. Evil is not at one with itself; 
self-laceration is its very essence.  
This laceration must be experienced in a state of constant tension; 
otherwise, it congeals into remorse and, as such, constitutes a mortal 
danger. Maurice Blanchot has observed that whenever the Sadean hero, 
as a result of some scruple, restores to society its power over him, he is doomed to t he worst kind of catastrophe.
18 Repentance and hesitation 
mean that one recognizes that one has judges. It therefore means 
accepting guilt instead of assuming that one is the free author of one’s 
acts. The man who consents to his passivity deserves all the defeats that 
the hostile world will inflict upon him. On the other hand: “The genuine 
libertine likes even the charges that are leveled against him for his execrable crimes. Have we not known men who loved even the tortures 
appointed by human vengeance, wh o suffered them gladly, who looked 
upon the scaffold as a throne of glory? These are men who have attained 
the highest degree of deliberate corruption.”  
At this ultimate degree, man is delivered not only of prejudices and 
shame, but of fear as well. His se renity is that of the ancient sage who 
18 See Maurice Blanchot: “Sade,” in the introductory section to The Marquis de 
Sade,  The Complete Justine. —Eds .                                          regarded as futile “things which do not depend on ourselves.” But the 
sage confined himself to a completely negative self- defense against 
possible suffering. The dark stoicism of Sade promises positive happiness. Thus , Coeur -de-fer lays down the following alternatives: 
“Either the crime which makes us happy, or the scaffold which prevents 
us from being unhappy.” Nothing can threaten the man who can 
transform his very defeats into triumphs. He fears nothing because for him everything is good. The brutal factitiousness of things does not 
crush the free man because it does not interest him. He is concerned 
only with their meaning, and the meaning depends only upon him. A person who is whipped or penetrated by another may be the other’s 
master as well as his slave. The ambivalence of pain and pleasure, of 
humiliation and pride, enables the libertine to dominate any situation. Thus, Juliette can transform into pleasure the same tortures that 
prostrate Justine. Fundamentally, the content of the experience is 
unimportant. The thing that counts is the subject’s intention.  
Thus, hedonism ends in ataraxia, which confirms the paradoxical 
relation between sadism and stoicism. The individual’s promised 
happiness is reduced to indiffer ence. “I have been happy, my dear, ever 
since I have been indulging cold -bloodedly in every sort of crime,” says 
Bressac. Cruelty appears in a new light, as an ascesis.  “The man who can 
grow callous to the pains of others becomes insensitive to his own.” I t is 
no longer excitement we must seek, but apathy.  A budding libertine, no 
doubt, needs violent emotions in order to feel the truth of his individual 
existence. But once he has possessed it, the pure form of crime will be 
enough to insure it. Crime has “a  character of grandeur and sublimity 
which prevails and always will prevail over the dull charms of virtue” and 
which renders vain all the contingent satisfactions one might be tempted to expect. With a severity similar to Kant’s, and which has its source in 
the same puritan tradition, Sade conceives the free act only as an act free 
of all feeling. If it were to obey emotional motives, it would make us 
Nature’s slaves again and not autonomous subjects.  
This choice is open to any individual, regardless of hi s situation. One 
of the victims locked up in the monk’s harem where Justine is languishing away manages to escape her fate by proving her worth. She stabs one of her companions with a viciousness that arouses the 
admiration of her masters and makes her the  queen of the harem. Those 
who remain among the oppressed do so because they are poor -spirited, 
and they must not be pitied. “What can there possibly be in common 
between the man who can do everything and the one who does not dare 
do anything?” The contras t of the two words is significant. For Sade, if 
one dares, one can. Blanchot has emphasized the austerity of this 
morality. Almost all of Sade’s criminals die violent deaths, and it is their 
merit that transforms their misfortunes into glory. But in fact, death is not the worst of failures, and whatever the fate Sade reserves for his 
heroes, he assures them a destiny which allows them to fulfill 
themselves. This optimism comes from an aristocratic vision of 
mankind, which involves, in its implacable severit y, a doctrine of 
predestination.  
For this quality of mind which enables a few elect spirits to rule over a 
herd of condemned souls appears as an arbitrary dispensation of grace. 
Juliette was saved and Justine lost from the beginning of time. Even 
more inte resting is the view that merit cannot entail success unless it is 
recognized.  The strength of mind of Valérie and Juliette would have been 
to no avail had it not deserved the admiration of their tyrants. Divided and separated though they be, it must be adm itted that they do bow down together before certain values, and they choose reality in the 
different guises which for Sade are, without question, equivalent to one 
another: orgasm -Nature -reason. Or, to be more precise, reality imposes 
itself upon them. The  hero triumphs through their mediation. But what 
saves him finally is the fact that he has staked everything on the truth. 
Sade believes in an absolute which is beyond all contingencies and which 
can never disappoint the one who invokes it as a last resort . 
It is only out of pusillanimity that everyone does not embrace such a 
sure ethic, for there can be no valid objection to it. It cannot offend a God who is a mere figment of the imagination; and since Nature is essentially division and hostility, to attac k her is to conform to her all the 
more. Yielding to his naturalistic prejudices, Sade writes: “The only real crime would be to outrage Nature,” and adds immediately afterward: “Is it conceivable that Nature would provide us with the possibility of a 
crime  that would outrage her?” She takes unto herself everything that 
happens. She even receives murder with indifference, since “the life 
principle of all creatures is death; this death is merely a matter of 
imagination.” Only man attaches importance to his own existence, but 
he “could completely wipe out his species without the universe’s feeling 
the slightest change.” He claims to have a sacred character which makes 
him untouchable, but he is only one animal among others. “Only man’s 
pride has made a crime of  murder.”  
Indeed, Sade’s plea is so forceful that he ends by denying any criminal 
character to crime. He realizes this himself. The last part of Juliette  is a 
convulsive attempt to rekindle the flame of Evil, but despite volcanoes, 
fires, poison, and plague, if there is no God, man is merely smoke. If 
Nature permits everything, then the worst catastrophes are a matter of 
indifference. “To my mind, man’s greatest torment is the impossibility of offending Nature!” And if Sade had staked everything only on the  
demoniacal horror of crime, his ethic would have ended in radical 
failure; but if he himself accepted this defeat, it was only because he was 
fighting for something else, namely, his profound conviction that crime is good.  
In the first place, crime is not  only inoffensive to Nature, it is useful to 
her. Sade explains in Juliette  that if “the spirit of the three kingdoms” 
were confronted with no obstacles, it would become so violent that it 
would paralyze the working of the universe. “There would be neither  
gravitation nor movement.” As a result of its inner contradiction, human 
crimes save it from the stagnation which would also endanger an overly 
virtuous society. Sade had certainly read Mandeville’s The Grumbling 
Hive,  which had had a great success at the  beginning of the eighteenth 
century. Mandeville had shown that the passions and defects of 
individuals served the public welfare, and even that the greatest 
scoundrels were the ones who worked most actively for the common good. When an inopportune convers ion made for the triumph of virtue, 
the hive was ruined. Sade also declared repeatedly that a collectivity that 
fell into virtue would thereby be pushed into inertia. We have here a 
kind of presage of the Hegelian theory according to which “the spirit’s 
restlessness” could not be abolished without involving the end of history. 
But, for Sade, immobility appears not as a static plenitude but as a pure absence. Mankind makes every effort by means of the conventions with 
which it is armed to cut all its ties with Nature; and it would become a 
pale phantom were it not for a few resolute souls who maintain within it, 
in spite of itself, the rights of truth —and truth means discord, war, and 
agitation.  In the strange text where he compares us all to blind men, Sade says 
that it is already enough that our limited senses prevent us from 
attaining the core of reality. Let us, therefore, not spoil our pleasure even 
more. Let us try to transcend our limits: “The most perfect being we could conceive would be the one who al ienated himself most from our 
conventions and found them most contemptible.” In its proper context, this statement recalls both Rimbaud’s demand for a “systematic derangement” of all the senses and the attempts of the surrealists to 
penetrate beyond human artifice to the mysterious heart of the real. But 
it is as moralist rather than as poet that Sade tries to shatter the prison of appearances. The mystified and mystifying society against which he 
rebels suggests Heidegger’s “the one,” in which the authenti city of 
existence is swallowed up. For Sade, too, it is a question of regaining 
authenticity by an individual decision. These comparisons are quite 
deliberate. Sade must be given a place in the great family of those who 
want to cut through the “banality of everyday life” to a truth which is 
immanent in this world. Within this framework, crime becomes a duty: 
“In a criminal society one must be a criminal.” This formula sums up his 
ethic. By means of crime, the libertine refuses any complicity with the 
evils of the given situation, of which the masses are merely the passive, 
and hence abject, reflection. It prevents society from reposing in injustice and creates an apocalyptic condition which constrains all individuals to 
insure their separateness, and thus th eir truth, in a state of constant 
tension.  
Nevertheless, it is in the name of the individual that it seems possible 
to raise the most convincing objections to Sade’s notions; for the 
individual is quite real, and crime does him real injury. It is here that  
Sade’s thinking proves to be extreme: the only thing that has truth for me is that which is enveloped in my own experience; the inner presence 
of other people is foreign to me. Hence, it does not concern me and 
cannot dictate any duty to me. “We don’t car e a bit about the torment of 
others; what have we in common with this torment?” And again: “There 
is no comparison between what others experience and what we feel. The 
strongest pain in other people is certainly nothing to us, but we are 
affected by the slightest tickle of pleasure that touches us.” The fact is that the only sure bonds among men are those they create in 
transcending themselves into another world by means of common 
projects. The only project that the hedonistic sensualism of the eighteenth c entury has to offer the individual is to “procure pleasant 
sensations and feelings.” It fixes him in his lonely immanence. Sade shows us in Justine  a surgeon who plans to dissect his daughter in order 
to further science and thereby mankind. Seen in terms of its 
transcendent future, mankind has value in his eyes; but what is a man 
when reduced to his mere vain presence? Just a pure fact, stripped of all value, who affects me no more than a lifeless stone. “My neighbor is 
nothing to me; there is not the sligh test relationship between him and 
myself.”  
These statements seem contradictory to Sade’s attitude in real life. It 
is obvious that if there were nothing in common between the tortures of 
the victims and the torturer, the latter would derive no pleasure fro m 
them. But what Sade is actually disputing is the a priori existence of a 
given relationship between myself and the other by which my behavior 
should be guided in the abstract. He does not deny the possibility of 
establishing such a relationship; and if h e rejects ethical recognition of 
other people founded on false notions of reciprocity and universality, it is 
in order to give himself the authority to destroy the concrete barriers of flesh which isolate human minds. Each mind bears witness only for itsel f 
as to the value it attributes to itself and has no right to impose this value 
upon others. But it can, in a singular and vivid manner, demand 
recognition of such value in its acts. This is the course chosen by the criminal, who, by the violence of his se lf-assertion, becomes real for the 
other person and thereby also reveals the other as really existing. But it should be noted that, quite unlike the conflict described by Hegel, this process involves no risk for the subject. His primacy is not at stake; 
regardless of what happens to him, he will accept no master. If he is 
defeated, he returns to a solitude which ends in death, but he remains sovereign.  
Thus, for the despot, other people do not represent a danger that 
could strike at the heart of his being. Nevertheless, this outside world from which he is excluded irritates him. He wants to penetrate it. 
Paradoxically enough, he is free to make things happen in this forbidden 
domain, and the temptation is all the more dizzying in that these events will be incommensurable with his experience. Sade repeatedly stresses 
the point that it is not the unhappiness of the other person which excites 
the libertine, but rather the knowledge that he is responsible for it. This 
is something very different from an abstract demoniacal pleasure. When 
he weaves his dark plots, he sees his freedom being transformed for 
others into a destiny. And as death is more certain than life, and suffering more certain than happiness, it is in persecutions and murder 
that he takes unto hims elf this mystery. But it is not enough to impose 
oneself upon the bewildered victim in the guise of destiny. Duped and 
mystified as he is, one possesses him, but only from without. In revealing 
oneself to the victim, the torturer incites him to manifest his freedom by 
his screams or prayers. If it is not revealed, the victim is unworthy of torture. One kills him or forgets about him. He may also escape his 
torturer by the violence of his revolt, be it flight, suicide, or victory. 
What the torturer demands i s that, alternating between refusal and 
submission, whether rebelling or consenting, the victim recognize, in any 
case, that his destiny is the freedom of the tyrant. He is then united to 
his tyrant by the closest of bonds. They form a genuine couple.  
Ther e are occasional cases in which the victim’s freedom, without 
escaping the destiny which the tyrant creates for it, succeeds in getting 
around it. It turns suffering into pleasure, shame into pride; it becomes 
an accomplice. It is then that the debauchee i s gratified to the full: 
“There is no keener pleasure for a libertine mind than to win proselytes.” 
To debauch an innocent creature is obviously a satanic act, but in view of 
the ambivalence of evil, we effect a genuine conversion by winning for it a new a dept. The capturing of a virginity, among other things, appears 
in this light as a ceremony of initiation. Just as we must outrage Nature in order to imitate her, though the outrage is canceled out since she herself demands it, so, in doing violence to an individual, we force him 
to assume his separateness, and thereby he finds a truth which reconciles 
him with his antagonist. Torturer and victim recognize their fellowship 
in astonishment, esteem, and even admiration.  
It has rightly been pointed out that th ere is never any permanent bond 
among Sade’s libertines, that their relationship involves a constant 
tension. But the fact that Sade systematically makes selfishness triumph 
over friendship does not prevent him from endowing friendship with 
reality. Noirce uil is very careful to let Juliette know that he is interested 
in her only because of the pleasure he finds in her company; but this 
pleasure implies a concrete relationship between them. Each feels 
confirmed within himself by the presence of an alter ego;  it is both an absolution and an exaltation. Group debauchery produces genuine 
communion among Sade’s libertines. Each one perceives the meaning of 
his acts and of his own figure through the minds of the others. I 
experience my own flesh in the flesh of an other; then my fellow creature 
really exists for me. The shocking fact of coexistence eludes our 
thinking, but we can dispose of its mystery the way Alexander cut 
through the Gordian knot: we must set ourselves down in it by acts. “What an enigma is man! —Yes, my friend, and that’s what made a very 
witty man say that it’s better to f …him than to understand him.” 
Eroticism appears in Sade as a mode of communication, the only valid one. We might say, parodying Claudel, that in Sade “the penis is the 
shortest p ath between two hearts.”  
5 
To sympathize with Sade too readily is to betray him. For it is our 
misery, subjection, and death that he desires; and every time we side 
with a child whose throat has been slit by a sex maniac, we take a stand against him. Nor d oes he forbid us to defend ourselves. He allows that a 
father may revenge or prevent, even by murder, the rape of his child. 
What he demands is that, in the struggle between irreconcilable existences, each one engage himself concretely in the name of his own 
existence. He approves of the vendetta, but not of the courts. We may 
kill, but we may not judge. The pretensions of the judge are more arrogant than those of the tyrant; for the tyrant confines himself to being 
himself, whereas the judge tries to erect  his opinions into universal laws. 
His effort is based upon a lie. For every person is imprisoned in his own 
skin and cannot become the mediator between separate persons from 
whom he himself is separated. And the fact that a great number of these individua ls band together and alienate themselves in institutions, of 
which they are no longer masters, gives them no additional right. Their 
number has nothing to do with the matter. There is no way of 
measuring the incommensurable. In order to escape the conflict s of 
existence, we take refuge in a universe of appearances, and existence 
itself escapes us. In thinking that we are defending ourselves, we are 
destroying ourselves. Sade’s immense merit lies in his taking a stand against these abstractions and alienatio ns which are merely flights from 
the truth about man. No one was more passionately attached to the concrete than he. He never respected the “everyone says” with which mediocre minds lazily content themselves. He adhered only to the truths 
which were derived from the evidence of his own actual experience. 
Thus he went beyond the sensualism of his age and transformed it into an ethic of authenticity.  
This does not mean that we can be satisfied with the solution he 
offers. For if Sade’s desire to grasp the very essence of the human condition in terms of his particular situation is the source of his 
greatness, it is also responsible for his limits. He thought that the 
solution he chose for himself was valid for everyone else, to the exclusion 
of any other. Where in he was doubly mistaken. For all his pessimism, he 
was, socially, on the side of the privileged, and he did not understand 
that social injustice affects the individual even in his ethical potentialities. Even rebellion is a luxury requiring culture, leis ure, and a 
certain detachment from the needs of existence. Though Sade’s heroes may pay with their lives for such rebellion, at least they do so after it has 
given their lives a valid meaning; whereas for the great majority of men it 
would be tantamount to a stupid suicide. Contrary to his wishes, it is 
chance, and not merit, which would operate in the selection of a criminal elite. If it is objected that he never strove for universality, that he wanted 
only to insure his own salvation—that does not do him justice. He offers 
himself as an example, since he wrote —and so passionately! —of his own 
experience. And he probably did not expect his appeal to be heard by 
everyone. But he did not think that he was addressing only the members 
of the privileged classes, whose arrogance he detested. The kind of 
predestination in which he believed was democratically conceived, and he would not have wanted to discover that it depended upon the 
economic circumstances from which, as he saw it, it should allow one to 
escape.  
Moreover, he did not suppose that there could be any possible way 
other than individual rebellion. He knew only two alternatives: abstract morality and crime. He was unaware of action. Though he might have suspected the possibility of a concrete communication among subjects 
through an undertaking which might unite all men in the common 
realization of their manhood, he did not stop there. Denying the individual all transcendence, he consigns him to an insignificance which 
sanctions the use of violence. But this violence in the void becomes 
absurd, and the tyrant who tries to assert himself by such violence 
discovers merely his own nothingness.  
To this contradiction, however, Sade might oppose another. For the 
eighteenth century’s fond dream of reconciling indiv iduals within their 
immanence is, in any case, unfeasible. Sade embodied in his own way his 
disappointment with the Terror. The individual who is unwilling to 
deny his particularity is repudiated by society. But if we choose to 
recognize in each subject only the transcendence which unites him 
concretely with his fellows, we are leading him only to new idols, and 
their particular insignificance will appear all the more obvious. We shall be sacrificing today to tomorrow, the minority to the majority, the 
freedom of each to the achievements of the community. Prison and the 
guillotine will be the logical consequences of this denial. The illusory 
brotherhood ends in crimes, wherein virtue recognizes her abstract features. “Nothing resembles virtue more than a gre at crime,” said Saint -
Just. Is it not better to assume the burden of evil than to subscribe to this abstract good which drags in its wake abstract slaughters? It is probably impossible to escape this dilemma. If the entire human population of the 
earth wer e present to each individual in its full reality, no collective 
action would be possible, and the air would become unbreathable for 
everyone. Thousands of individuals are suffering and dying vainly and 
unjustly at every moment, and this does not affect us.  If it did, our 
existence would be impossible. Sade’s merit lies not only in his having 
proclaimed aloud what everyone admits with shame to himself, but in 
the fact that he did not simply resign himself. He chose cruelty rather 
than indifference. This is p robably why he finds so many echoes today, 
when the individual knows that he is more the victim of men’s good 
consciences than of their wickedness. To confront this terrifying 
optimism is to come to his aid. In the solitude of his prison cells, Sade 
lived through an ethical darkness similar to the intellectual night in 
which Descartes shrouded himself. He emerged with no revelation but 
at least he disputed all the easy answers. If ever we hope to transcend the separateness of individuals, we may do so only on condition that we be 
aware of its existence. Otherwise, promises of happiness and justice 
conceal the worst dangers. Sade drained to the dregs the moment of 
selfishness, injustice, and misery, and he insisted upon its truth. The 
supreme value of his tes timony lies in its ability to disturb us. It forces us to re-examine thoroughly the basic problem which haunts our age in 
different forms: the true relation between man and man.  
—T RANSLATED BY ANNETTE MICHELSON  
   
Nature as Destructive Principle  
by Pierre Klossowski  
 
When it wants martyrs, atheism has only to 
speak; my blood is ready to flow.  
—La Nouvelle Justine  
In Sade’s work the uneasy conscience of the debauched libertine represents a transit ional state of mind between the conscience of social 
man and the atheistic conscience of the philosopher of Nature. It offers 
at one and the same time those negative elements which Sadean 
thought, in its dialectical movement, makes great efforts to elimina te, 
and the positive elements which will make it possible to move beyond 
this intermediary state of mind in order to get to the atheistic and asocial 
philosophy of Nature and a moral system based on the idea of Nature as 
perpetual motion.  
The libertine’s c onscience maintains a negative relationship with God 
on one hand and with his neighbor on the other. Both the notion of God and the notion of his neighbor are indispensable to him. The 
relationship with God is negative because the libertine’s conscience, a s 
we find it in Sade, is not atheistic in a cold -blooded way; rather its 
atheism is the result of effervescence and therefore of resentment; his 
atheism is only a form of sacrilege. Only the profanation of religious symbols is able to convince him of his a pparent atheism, which is thus 
clearly distinguishable from the conscience of the atheistic philosopher 
for whom sacrilege has no significance beyond its revelation of the 
weakness of the individual who indulges in it.  
At times the atheism which is affecte d by the libertine conscience, and 
the wrong which it projects doing, are meant to be provocations addressed to the absent God, as though scandalous provocations were a way of forcing that God to manifest his existence:  
If there were a God and if that God possessed power, would he allow the virtue which honors him to be sacrificed to vice as you intend to do; would this all -powerful God allow a weak creature 
like myself who, compared to him, is as the mite in the eye of 
the elephant, would he, I ask, allow this feeble creature to insult him, scoff at him, stand up to him, and offend him as I take 
pleasure in doing at every moment of the day?  
This kind of impunity adds to the delight of the libertine conscience: 
the greater the punishment merited by his actio n, the greater the value 
which he attributes to crime. His conscience is always activated by 
remorse; indeed, the remorse seems to provide the energy for his crimes. 
The debauched libertine does not seek to commit actions which have 
been rendered indiffere nt by perpetual motion, as the atheist 
philosophers claim. What he seeks to commit is evil; the pursuit of evil 
will be essential to the extension of his sphere of enjoyment: “What 
animates us is not the object of libertinage, but rather the idea of evil.”  
As a result, the object of libertinage holds no interest unless it leads to 
the doing of greater evil. Nor does he exclude the possibility of doing 
evil well; on the contrary, in that possibility he finds the whole value of crime. The conscience of the de bauched Sadean keeps its claim on free 
will and uses its moral categories, all the while maintaining a belief in its 
ability to do evil. The conscience of the debauched libertine, according 
to Sade’s description, not only appears to be in complete opposition to atheism but also has a relationship with the analysis of evil for evil’s sake 
which we find in Saint Augustine’s Confessions.  
Such a conscience is consequently susceptible to elaborating an entire 
destructive theology centered about the religion of a  Supreme Being of 
Wickedness, the only Supreme Being that Saint -Fond, the exemplar of 
the great libertine and debauched lord, is willing to profess. This religion 
of evil is not yet ready to deny crime as the philosophy of perpetual 
motion does, but prefer s to admit it as an outflow from the existence of 
an infernal God. Nor is it the refutation of the dogma found in the first 
version of Justine,  that the innocent must be sacrificed for the salvation 
of the guilty. It is only the other side of that doctrine ; it exalts the 
necessity of injustice existing in God. In fact, confronted with the mystery of Revelation, the astonished reason—if it wishes to articulate 
the dogma in language which also conveys its sense of scandal —is 
obliged to substitute the material  of blasphemy for the revealed matter. 
In that way it gives an exact expression to the impression made by the mystery on a reasoning faculty which has been abandoned to its own 
resources. From that point on, when confronted with crime and suffering, it wil l see in orthodoxy an attempt to legitimate the crimes of 
the guilty party through a theory of expiation based on the expiatory virtue of the sufferings of the innocent. Actually, orthodoxy attributes 
crime to man’s freedom to sin, and attributes the expia tory virtue earned 
by the innocent party’s suffering to the innocent party’s account. What 
the scandalized reason is imputing to orthodoxy is precisely what reason itself wishes to proclaim as its own doctrine —a doctrine which, though 
its conclusions go in a quite contrary direction, will have the appearance 
of seeking to set up its meritorious terms on the basis of a supernatural 
origin for sin. All the ills with which God afflicts man can thus be considered as the ransom God exacts before he allows man th e right to 
inflict suffering and to be unlimitedly vicious. To the extent that God can be viewed as the original guilty party who attacked man before man could attack him, to that extent man has acquired the right and the 
strength to attack his neighbor. A nd if this divine aggression has been of 
vast proportions, it has thereby legitimized for all time the impunity of 
the guilty party and the sacrifice of the innocent.  
If the evils which overwhelm me from the day of my birth to the 
day of my death prove God’s indifference to me, then I may very well be mistaken about what I call evil. What I characterize 
as evil where I am concerned is apparently a very great good 
where the being who has brought me into the world is concerned. And if I receive evil from othe rs, I enjoy the right of 
returning it, and even the facility of delivering evil to them first; 
once I become aware of this, evil becomes good for me as it is 
for the being who has created me in his dealings with me, and I 
am pleased by the evil I do to oth ers as God is pleased by the 
evil he has done to me …. 
Evil “which is a moral being and not a created being, an eternal being which existed before the world and which formed the monstrous and 
execrable being who created so bizarre a world,” can only sustain  that 
world through evil, can only perpetuate it for evil, and allow other 
creatures to exist only if they are impregnated with evil:  This mode which is the very soul of the creator is also that of 
the creature who is shaped by it. It will exist even after  the soul’s 
demise. Everything has to be wicked, barbarous, inhuman —as 
your God is —and these are the vices which must be adopted if 
one wishes to please him; not that there is much hope of 
succeeding, since that evil which always does harm, the evil 
which is God’s essence, could not possibly be susceptible either 
to love or gratitude. If this God who is the center of evil and 
ferocity torments man, and has Nature and other men torment 
him throughout his existence, what reason is there to doubt that he acts in the same way, and perhaps even involuntarily, on this 
wisp which survives after man and which …is nothing other 
than evil? …No matter what his conduct in this world may be, 
no man can escape this frightful fate because everything which 
has been brought to life in the womb of evil must return there. 
That is the law of the universe. Thus the hateful elements of the 
wicked man are absorbed into the center of the wickedness 
which is God in order to return and animate still other beings 
who will be born to similar corruption because they are the fruit 
of corruption.  
What will happen to the good creature?  
The man you call virtuous is not good, or if he is good toward 
you, he certainly is not toward God, who is nothing other than 
evil, who desires nothing but evil , who seeks nothing but evil. 
The man you speak of is simply weak, and weakness is an evil. 
Such a man, since he is weaker than the absolutely vicious 
being, …will suffer all the more …. [But] the more man shall have manifested vices and failures in this wor ld, the closer shall 
he come to his unchanging goal which is wickedness, and the 
less will he have to suffer consequently when he is reunited in 
the home of wickedness which I consider to be the prime matter of the world’s formation.  
Thus “far from denying  God, as the atheist does, or of pardoning Him 
all his wrongs, as deists do,” the conscience of the debauched libertine agrees to admit God with all his vices. The existence of evil in the world 
affords him the chance to blackmail God, whom he considers th e eternal 
Guilty Party because he is the original Aggressor. To accomplish this 
goal, the libertine constantly has recourse to traditional moral categories 
as though to a pact which God has violated. Suffering becomes a 
promissory note drawn on God.  
The li bertine conscience also needs to establish an equally negative 
relationship with its neighbor: “I am pleased with the evil I do to others as God is pleased with the evil he does to me.” The libertine’s enjoyment 
comes from the fact of the continuous opposition between this idea and 
the notion of love for one’s neighbor. He makes use of this opposition in 
establishing his theory of pleasure through comparison.  One of the four 
debauchees in The 120 Days of Sodom  says: 
Only one essential is missing from our ha ppiness —pleasure 
through comparison, a pleasure which can only be born from 
the sight of the unhappy, and we see none of that breed here. 
It’s at the sight of the man who isn’t enjoying what I have and 
who is suffering that I know the charm of being able t o say: I 
am happier than he is. Wherever men are equal and where 
differences do not exist, happiness will never exist; it’s quite like the situation of the man who doesn’t appreciate the price of 
good health until he has been ill.  
How then are the unfortunate to be comforted? 
The pleasure which comes to me from this pleasant comparison of their state with mine would not exist if I were to comfort 
them. By withdrawing them from their misery, I would allow 
them to taste a moment of happiness which, since it d raws them 
closer to me, would remove the whole joy of comparison…. In 
order to establish more firmly this essential difference in 
happiness, it would be preferable to aggravate their condition….  
Thus the conscience of the debauched libertine, though it tur ns them 
upside down, is content to remain with those moral categories which the atheist conscience will condemn as structures forged by the weak. But, out of their need for comparisons, the strong put their own strength on 
trial. By making a comparison of his condition with that of the 
unfortunate, the fortunate man makes a fatal identification with him. In 
tormenting the object of his lust in order to derive pleasure from his 
suffering, and by seeing in the suffering of another his own suffering, he 
will a lso see his own punishment. Saint -Fond, after having mistreated a 
family of poor people outrageously, supposedly has himself assailed by 
two men whom he has ordered to whip him. This staged whipping is 
carried off so well that the fear which he inspires in the weak becomes, 
in this exhibition of strength, his own fear: “I love to make them 
undergo the sort of thing which troubles and overwhelms my existence so cruelly ….” At this stage, his conscience remains riveted to the reality 
of the others; he hopes to  deny that reality but only intensifies it by the 
love-hatred which he avows for others. The debauched man remains attached to the victim of his lust and to the individuality of that victim 
whose sufferings he would like to prolong “beyond the bounds of 
eternity —if eternity has any.” The true atheist, to the degree that he 
really exists, attaches himself to no object; caught in Nature’s perpetual 
motion, he obeys his impulses, looking upon others as no more than 
Nature’s slag. The conscience of the debauche d libertine cannot give up 
its all too human aspirations; perhaps only the stoic atheist would be 
capable of doing so. The libertine’s conscience remains obsessed not only 
by his neighbor as victim, but also by death. He cannot give up the 
singular hope of a future and infernal life which amounts to saying that 
he cannot consent to the annihilation of his “sinning body” precisely 
because of his senseless desire to work out his fury on the same victim 
throughout eternity.  
In this phase, his conscience none t he less betrays a murky need for 
expiation—an expiation which, if his need could be elucidated, would have no other direction than that of self -liquidation, a freeing of the self 
by the self. These are the positive particulars of his conscience. The 
degree to which he seeks expiation is the degree to which his conscience 
represents one of the moments of Sade’s own conscience. His need for 
expiation seeks satisfaction in his willingness to risk eternal damnation—in order, without doubt, to nourish the suffer ings of his victim; but his 
willingness also implies a continued desire to share that suffering.  
Saint -Fond reveals still another characteristic trait of the libertine 
conscience: pride in his situation, scorn for his fellow man, and, finally, a 
hatred, mi xed with fear, of “that vile low life known as the people.” All 
the elements of this haughty attitude go hand in glove with the exercise 
of humiliating debaucheries, most of which are planned to deliver a 
shock to popular morality: “Only minds organized like ours know how well the humiliation imposed by certain wanton acts serves as pride’s 
nourishment.” In effect, what the popular or, better, the bourgeois 
mentality would be incapable either of admitting or of understanding is 
that those who are supposed t o be the guardians of the social order 
should, by their voluntary degradation, challenge that order and, in so 
doing, overturn all social values. But in this humiliation—even though it 
is only a fiction for the Sadean libertine —there is also manifest a des ire 
for voluntary debasement and, in that need, an indication of the 
libertine’s belief that his superior social position gives him special rights. 
Chief among these rights is his right to revise the notion of what man is. It is an experimental right,  one which could not be extended to the 
common run of mortals without danger. It is precisely the exercise of this right to conduct forbidden experiments  which, born from the libertine 
conscience, will form one of the fundamental commitments of the 
Sadean consc ience.  
Sade’s materialistic atheism, when expressed in works published a 
decade after the Dialogue between a Priest and a Dying Man,  has lost all 
the serenity characteristic of that pamphlet. The materialists and 
Encyclopedists, who were Sade’s contemporar ies, when they admit 
matter considered as perpetual motion to the role of the universal agent which excludes any need for God’s existence, imply that knowledge of 
the laws governing this matter may allow for a better individual and social morality, as well as an unlimited rational exploitation of Nature by 
man. Still, the arguments of La Mettrie, Helvétius, and Holbach 
undergo an unexpected development when they come into contact with 
Sadean thought. For Sade the substitution of Nature in a state of perpetu al 
motion  for God signifies, not the arrival of a happier era for humanity, 
but only the beginning of tragedy —the tragedy being man’s open and conscious acceptance of the change. Here we can detect the Nietzschean 
theme which opposes to the sufferings of t he innocent a consciousness 
which agrees to endure its guilt because the guilt is the price of feeling alive. This is the hidden sense of the atheism which differentiates Sade so clearly from his contemporaries. To admit matter considered as 
perpetual moti on as the one and only universal agent is equivalent to 
agreeing to live as an individual in a state of perpetual motion.  
As soon as a body appears to have lost motion by its passage 
from the state of life to what is improperly called death, it tends, 
from  that very moment, toward dissolution; yet dissolution is a 
very great state of motion. There is, therefore, no moment when 
the body of the animal is at rest; it never dies; but because it no 
longer exists for us, we believe that it no longer exists at all . 
Bodies are transmuted …metamorphosed, but they are never 
inert. Inertia is absolutely impossible for matter whether matter 
is organized or not. Weigh these truths carefully and you will see where they lead and what a twist they give to human 
morality.  
Once arrived at this observation, finding himself on the threshold of the 
unknown, his thought turning back on itself, he withdraws still further, scandalized by the sheer inevitability of his conclusions. Then he takes 
hold of himself and accepts his discove ries. As a result, the atheistic and 
materialistic speeches of some of his characters strike us as just so many 
moments in his thought’s effort to get away from moral categories; this 
is what gives the speeches their quite special dramatic flavor. Matter, 
which is perpetually in motion and which trembles with pleasure 
without being able to obtain any pleasure on this side of destruction or dissolution, seems to be neither blind nor without will. Isn’t there some 
purpose in this universal agent?  
We become th e public at a strange spectacle where Sade insults 
Nature as he used to insult God; he discovers in Nature the traits of that God who created the greatest number of men with the aim of making 
them run the risk of eternal tortures “even though it would have  
conformed more with goodness and with reason and justice to create 
only stones and plants rather than to shape men whose conduct could 
only bring endless chastisements.” But what a frightful state Nature puts 
us in,  
since disgust with life becomes so strong in the soul that there is 
not a single man who would want to live again, even if such an 
offer were made on the day of his death …yes, I abhor Nature; 
and I detest her because I know her well. Aware of her frightful 
secrets, I have fallen back on myself and I have felt …I have 
experienced a kind of pleasure in copying her foul deeds. What 
a contemptible and odious being to make me see the daylight 
only in order to have me find pleasure in everything that does 
harm to my fellow men. Eh quoi!  I had hardly be en born…I had 
hardly quit my cradle when she drew me toward the very 
horrors which are her delight! This goes beyond corruption…it 
is an inclination, a penchant. Her barbarous hand can only nourish evil; evil is her entertainment. Should I love such a 
moth er? No; but I will imitate her, all the while detesting her. I 
shall copy her, as she wishes, but I shall curse her unceasingly …. 
These are the words of the chemist, Almani, a character whose 
psychology reflects marvelously well one of the positions set forth in Sade’s thought. Like the debauched libertine, Almani is still evolving 
within the sphere of moral categories. Evil strikes him as being Nature’s 
unique element, as it was the unique element of the God who was absent  
to the debauched libertine. And t his criminal chemist also believes that 
the solution to the problem of evil is to be evil. Sade’s thought here 
offers a further attitude of purely human revolt, a revolt which has no 
hope other than to remain revolt. The reproach directed against Nature, even more than the reproach directed against God, is clearly destined to 
remain without answer and even without any psychic benefit, since it is addressed to a situation whose very corruption excludes any idea of justification. The atheist mind which launch ed the anathema against 
Nature, had wanted its effort to render absurd the reproach which he cannot repress and which escapes from him in spite of himself. His conscience, though it accepts Nature as the supreme instance, has not yet 
given up the mechanism  of moral categories which, in his struggle 
against God, has been found to be useful and necessary. In God his 
conscience found vengeance. But once God has been rejected, his 
maneuver is undone by the discovery of perpetual motion. Since the 
notion of move ment absorbs all idea of annihilation that goes beyond a 
simple modification of matter’s forms, man can no longer reply by 
outrage to what he considers Nature’s outrage; man feels he is 
unavenged.  
We see another factor developing in Almani’s statement. Its  effect is 
to show us that evil appears in his speech only as a simple term adequate for translating the effect of the natural dynamism with which the 
scientist’s mind hopes to identify itself. What we see in Almani’s resolve 
to copy the “foul deeds” of Na ture is an effort at reconciliation with 
universal order or, better, with universal disorder. As his indignation expresses its astonishment, curiosity and the desire to know become 
manifest; the mind tends more and more toward considering itself as an 
integral part of Nature, which has now become the domain of its 
investigations. If mind discovers in natural phenomena, not only blind 
and necessary laws, but also its own purpose —and thereby a coincidence 
of its purpose with those natural phenomena —then those  phenomena 
will belong to it as so many suggestions which mind must bring into reality.  
“Punishments are always proportionate to the crime, and crimes are 
always proportionate to the amount of information possessed by the guilty party: the Flood presuppose s extraordinary crimes, and those 
crimes presuppose that we possess information infinitely greater than what we really have.” These are Joseph de Maistre’s comments on original sin. What I should like to emphasize here for later use is the 
idea of a crime -information relationship, a notion strikingly represented 
in Sade’s thought and even more strikingly in that of certain of his 
heroes. If knowledge ends by becoming a crime, what we call crime must 
contain the key to knowledge. As a result, it is only by e xtending the 
sphere of crime further and further that mind, reaching those 
extraordinary crimes,  will recover its lost knowledge —that knowledge 
which is infinitely greater than what we have.  
Possessed by such dispositions, Sade will push materialistic athe ism to 
a point where it will be invested with the form of a truly transcendental fatalism. We see an example of this in the System of Nature  set forth by 
the Pope in his long discussion with Juliette. Here Sade’s thought 
determinedly gets away from its hum an condition in order to attempt 
integration with a mythical cosmogony —the only chance it has, 
apparently, of getting away from the trial where it stands as much accused as it was at the beginning of its efforts. In vain Sade seeks a 
judge who will acquit him, and does this even though he has withdrawn 
the judge’s competence in the realm of human morality.  
Sade first of all admits of the existence of an original and eternal 
Nature who exists outside the realm of the three kingdoms of species 
and of creature s [the animal, vegetable, and mineral]. “Were Nature to 
find herself subject to other laws, the creatures who are the result of her 
present laws would no longer exist.” Nature would still exist, though 
under different laws. “Creatures, neither beautiful nor good nor 
valuable,” are the result only of blind laws. Nature creates man in spite of herself; she creates laws specially applicable to man and, from that point 
on, she has no further control over him. At the beginning of the Pope’s 
speech, this Nature i s seen as being entirely distinct from man’s nature; 
but though man is no longer dependent on this original Nature, he still 
cannot escape from the laws which are properly his: the laws of self -
preservation and procreation. These laws, moreover, are in no way 
necessary to Nature, and this is the first indication of his irrelevance 
within the core of the universe. He can quadruple his species or 
annihilate it completely without the universe’s feeling the slightest 
change. Here Sade sees Nature becoming aware of the competitor her 
own movement has raised up:  
If man multiplies his species, he is right according to his own 
lights; if he destroys his species, he is, by the same lights, wrong; 
but in Nature’s eyes all this is changed. If he multiplies, he is 
wrong  because he takes away from Nature the honor of a new 
phenomenon, since the result of the laws which govern him is 
necessarily new creatures. If those who have been issued forth do not propagate, Nature will issue forth new ones and will 
enjoy a faculty sh e no longer has …. 
In multiplying, man, since he follows a law inherent only to him, does 
decided harm to the natural phenomena which are within Nature’s 
capacity. Foreseeing the conflict, Sade modifies his terminology to 
render it more accurate for a description of the process he wishes to 
dramatize: “If creatures destroy themselves, they are right as far as Nature is concerned, for they then cease to make use of a received 
faculty, but not of an imposed law, and commit Nature to the necessity 
of developing  one of her most beautiful faculties ….” 
Multiplication of the species is no longer considered to be a law which 
the creature cannot get away from; it is only a faculty which competes with Nature’s original faculty. More and more, as the speech gets more deeply into its description of the conflict, Nature, first admitted as a 
force obeying blind laws, reveals herself as having purpose: she is creative evolution.  Sade says openly that man, in propagating or by not destroying 
himself, binds Nature to the secondary laws of the species and deprives 
her of her greatest potential. Nature, if she thereby finds herself the first 
slave to her own laws, seems only more aware of it and manifests with 
even greater impetuousness the desire to break the chains of her laws:  
Doesn’t she show us to what extent our multiplication disturbs her…how much she would like once more to escape by 
destroying our procreative ability …doesn’t she prove this to us 
by the afflictions with which she ceaselessly overwhelms us, by 
the divisions  and dissensions she sows in our midst …by this 
tendency toward murder with which she inspires us at every 
instant …. Consequently, those murders which our laws punish so rigorously, those murders which we assume to be the greatest 
outrage which one can do t o Nature, not only, as you can see, 
do her no wrong but cannot do her wrong; rather they become useful to her outlook, since we see her imitating them so often and since it is certain that she does so only because she hopes 
for the total annihilation of th e creatures she has issued forth in 
order the better to enjoy her faculty of creating new ones. The 
greatest scoundrel on earth, the abominable and ferocious and 
barbarous murderer is thus only the organ of her laws …only the 
motive power of her wishes, and  the surest agent of her caprices.  
In these pages we see the dimensions of the path which Sadean man has traversed from his theology of a Being supreme in its wickedness to this 
conception of Nature. We saw him at first accepting the existence of God in or der to declare God guilty and to take advantage of God’s 
everlasting guilt; later we saw him confusing this God with a no less ferocious Nature, but still keeping himself on the side of moral 
categories. But the satanization of Nature was only a preparatio n for the 
liquidation of moral categories. The conception of a Nature which aspires to recapture her highest potential signifies in effect the 
dehumanization of Sade’s thought —a dehumanization which now takes 
on the form of a singular metaphysics. If Sade,  in contradistinction to 
what he habitually affirms, now goes so far as to consider man entirely distinct from Nature, it is primarily in order to emphasize better a 
profound lack of harmony between the notion of the human being and 
the notion of the unive rse. Eager to reclaim his own rights, he is also 
eager to explain that the extent of Nature’s efforts must be measured in direct proportion to that lack of harmony. In Sade’s attempt we might 
also see his will to separate himself from man by imposing on hi mself the categorical imperative of a cosmic situation which demands the 
annihilation of all that is human. Without doubt, what Sade is trying to 
do is declare his separation from a Nature which is the slave of her own 
laws—and to do so without Nature’s knowing about it. But though 
Nature, as it is said elsewhere in the System  of Pope Pius VI, uses this 
means to recover her powers, her work in making populations perish from time to time from illness, cataclysms, wars, and discord, or from crimes of scoundre ls, actually works only to the profit of that secondary 
nature of the three kingdoms which are ruled by the laws of a perpetual metempsychosis. Even were she to send out great criminals or great plagues capable of annihilating the three kingdoms, she would only 
commit another impotent act. To bring about their disappearance, Nature would have to destroy herself totally, and she does not have that kind of mastery.  
Thus the scoundrel’s murders not only help Nature attain goals she would otherwise never fulfil l but also aid the laws which the 
kingdoms received along with their initial impetus. I say at their 
first impetus in order to facilitate understanding of my system; 
since there was really no creation, and since Nature is eternal, 
the impetus is given perp etually and lasts as long as there are 
beings. The impetus would end when there were no more creatures, and at that point would favor other impetuses which would be those desired by Nature; but Nature will only arrive at 
that point when there is a total de struction of the goal toward 
which crimes tend. The result of this situation is that a criminal 
who might be able to overwhelm the three kingdoms all at once 
by annihilating them and their productive faculties would be the 
individual who had best served Nature …. A too perfect harmony would have even more drawbacks than disorder; 
if war, discord, and crimes were to be banished from the earth, the mind 
of the three kingdoms, turned to the greatest violence, would then 
destroy all the other laws of Nature.  
The heavenly bodies would all stop, the influences would be 
suspended because of the unbalancing dominion of one of them; there would no longer be either the force of gravity or of motion. Thus it is that the crimes of men, disturbing the power 
of the three k ingdoms, prevent that power from arriving at a 
point of dominance and maintain that perfect equilibrium in the 
universe which Horace called rerum concordia discors.  Crime is 
therefore necessary to the world; and the most useful crimes are 
those which creat e the greatest disturbance: a refusal to 
propagate and destruction…these are examples of crimes 
essential to Nature …. [Yet] enough crimes will never be 
committed on this earth to satiate Nature’s burning thirst for 
them.  
Sade soars directly into myth. The philosophy of his century no longer 
suffices once it becomes a question of resolving the problem raised by cruelty. As we have just seen, he would like to integrate  cruelty into a 
universal system where it would be brought to its pure state by recovering i ts cosmic function. Henceforth, passions —from the simple  
passions to the complex  ones—have a transcendental significance: if man 
believes he is satisfying himself in being obedient to them, he is in reality 
only satisfying an aspiration which goes beyond h is person.  
That murderer believes he is destroying; he thinks that he is 
absorbing. This is sometimes the starting point of his remorse. Let us bring him complete tranquillity on that score; and if the 
system which I have just developed is not yet within h is grasp, 
let us prove to him by facts visible to his eye that he has not even the honor of destroying, that the annihilation of which he boasts when he is healthy and which causes him to tremble 
when he is ill, is thoroughly null, and that it is impossibl e to 
achieve any success in his enterprise.  
Let us for a moment compare the principle of life and death, which will 
determine Sade’s new position on the problem of destruction, with 
Freud’s death instinct. Freud, opposing this instinct to that of Eros —the 
life instinct —uses the two notions as the basis for his ontological theory. 
While Freud only envisages life at the organic level, Sade —much more 
the metaphysician despite appearances to the contrary— admits of no 
difference between life at the organic and i norganic level; he detaches 
himself from all considerations which relate to the species and to the social milieu in order to offer a single principle:  
The principle of life in all beings is no other than the death 
principle; we receive them both and nouris h them both at the 
same time. At that moment we call death, everything appears to 
dissolve; we believe this because of the excessive difference 
which is then visible in this portion of matter which no longer 
seems alive. But this death is only imaginary; it exists only figuratively and has no reality. Matter, deprived of the more 
subtle portion of matter which endowed it with motion, is not 
thereby destroyed; all it does is change form, become corrupt, 
and that is already a proof of the motion it conserves.  It 
nourishes the earth, fertilizes it, and helps in the regeneration of the other kingdoms as well as in its own. There is, in the end, 
no difference between the first life we receive and this second 
life we call death; for the first is made from the matt er formed 
in the woman’s womb while the second follows the same 
process: matter is renovated and reorganized in the earth’s 
entrails …. The original creation is an example of this: these 
laws produce their first progeny through a process of 
exhaustion; they  produce other progeny only through 
destruction. In the first instance, matter is corrupted; in the second, it is putrefied. In both processes we see the only causes of this immensity of successive creations; they are nothing but 
the initial principles of exhaustion and annihilation.  
Corruption, putrefaction, dissolution, exhaustion, and annihilation: 
these are aspects of life’s phenomena which will have a meaning for Sade 
that is as moral as it is physical. Only motion is real; creatures are 
nothing but motion’s changing phases. There is a temptation to make a 
very cautious comparison between this conception of perpetual motion 
and the Hindu doctrine of samsara. Nature’s aspiration to escape from 
herself in order to recover an unconditioned state would seem  to be a 
dream much like that proposed by the notion of Nirvana —at least to the 
extent that a Western man has a capacity for such dreams. Sade, rather 
than setting off on the path which Schopenhauer searched for, thrashes out the one Nietzsche was to follow: the acceptance of samsara, the 
eternal return of the same thing.  
Sadean man —having accepted the notion of a Nature which is no more 
shrewd in wickedness than the Supreme Being, no more voracious than the Minotaur, but rather enslaved from the start by h er own laws and the first among the universe’s victims —will arrive at a point where he 
considers himself a microcosm of Nature, suffering, like Nature, from 
his own activity. That activity, rather than allowing Nature to achieve 
her highest potential, allo ws her only to create, to destroy, to create 
anew, along with her creatures, in a cycle which proves her impotence. 
The Pope’s System  shows us two competing forces: Nature’s aspiration to 
recover her highest potential, and the principle of the life and dea th of 
the three kingdoms which is the principle of perpetual motion bringing 
about successive creations. In reality, the phenomena are the same. 
Perpetual motion is blind, but the aspiration to escape from the laws of this motion  by destruction and crime d oes no more than show our 
awareness of motion’s role. Sadean man will discover his own conflict in this dualism and perhaps catch glimpses of a final solution. The problem of the cyclic creation and destruction posed by Nature is not much 
different from th e problem of the reality of others as it appears to his 
conscience. Just as Nature creates obstacles for herself by her will to 
create, Sadean man creates his neighbor out of a will to create himself. 
He seems to do this out of a need to destroy the other.  Yet he had once 
aspired to a break with this necessity; through his aspiration toward 
innocence he had admitted the existence of others and given them reality. Still he remained saddled with the necessity of destroying; and 
since he wished to prolong the existence of others, he became guilty at that very moment because he had decided to prolong the others’ 
existence only in order to destroy them. Like Nature, which always and 
simultaneously aspires to and renounces its highest potential, Sadean 
man faces t he question of whether he can renounce others and be 
prepared to destroy.  If comparison with the unfortunate —a comparison which remains 
indispensable if the libertine is to know happiness —presupposes the 
existence of his neighbor, the first step to be take n in the direction of a 
renaturalization of cruelty will be to deny the reality of his neighbor and 
to rid the notion of neighbor of its meaning. In implying the neighbor’s 
existence, the pleasure of comparison implies evil. Love of neighbor, the 
chimera w hich haunted Sade, is converted by the libertine conscience 
into a love -hatred of the neighbor. Here the libertine makes a mistake, 
for love -hatred of his neighbor, while it helps liquidate the reality of the 
other, liquidates his own reality.  
How can Sade an man ever give up his object, which is the other, and 
accept destruction in all its purity, as he must do if he is faithful to his idea of a Nature freed from the need of creating? To do so, he must renounce, not just the other, but also his individual c ondition as a self.  
In apparently solipsistic terms, a quantity of statements made by 
Sade’s characters implies a doctrine whose conclusions are thoroughly opposed. Under the guise of a Nature aspiring to its  highest potential,  the 
doctrine takes absolute and sovereign desire as its principle. But in the 
name of this principle, it establishes between the self and the other a 
negative reciprocity:  
The false ideas which we have of the creatures who surround us are still the source of an infinite number of jud gments whose 
moral basis is erroneous. We forge chimerical duties for 
ourselves where our relations with these creatures are concerned, 
simply because they think they have similar duties toward us. If 
we have the strength to renounce all that we expect fro m others, 
our duties toward them will be immediately annihilated. What, after all, are all the earth’s creatures when measured against a single one of our desires? And by what right should I deprive 
myself of the least of my desires in order to please a cr eature 
who is nothing to me and who holds no interest whatsoever for me?… 
Once the other is nothing, not only am I no longer anything for him, 
but I am nothing where my own conscience is concerned, and it makes 
little difference whether the conscience is s till mine. For if I break with 
the other on the moral level, I shall also have broken, on the level of 
existence, with what I properly am. At any moment I can fall to the 
mercy of the other who will offer me the same sort of statement as my 
own: Let us hav e the strength to renounce all that we expect from 
others. The wager is pragmatic. Yet, even before this kind of statement 
is made, the reflective process which leads to it has gone much further in its investigations.  
The moral nihilism which tends to supp ress awareness of oneself and 
the other on the level of acts, but which implies no fewer contradictions 
on Sade’s part, appears here as the last consequence of his atheism. In 
effect Sade could not limit himself to denying the existence of a personal 
God, the principle of a self who is responsible and who is the guarantor 
of Sade’s own selfhood and privacy; he must also attack him. Just as we 
saw him attacking the principle of the conservation and propagation of 
the species, we see him now making an issue of the normative principle of individuation in order to give free scope to the erosive forces he has 
described: the perversions and abnormalities which indicate the 
emergence within the individual of a sensitive polymorphism by which 
conscious individuation has been accomplished within individuals. But 
far from being satisfied with describing those abnormalities, he lends them the eloquence of his spokesmen who refute the existence of a God, guarantor of the norms, in order to plead, in the language of those  very 
norms, the cause of the abnormalities they bear. Now the supposed 
abnormalities are abnormalities only to the degree that they are 
expressed in this language —the language of a conscience which is unable 
to take account of their positive content, that  is, of the positive 
polymorphism which, in a negative manner and in accordance with Sade’s rationalistic terminology, remains tributary. Here we are touching on the singular relationship between Sade and reason, on the constant 
interaction between the abnormal and thought, and on the contradiction 
between reason’s effort to enunciate universals even as it pleads —and in 
pleading offers an extreme example of reason reduced exclusively to its 
own terms —the very special cause of abnormality. But we are at the 
same time touching on the adventure of a conscience and are seeing its 
misunderstandings and its snares once it begins to mediate on the 
meaning of those forces which are hostile to individuation. What it does 
is invert those forces so that they may be tra nsformed into what the 
agent most needs in order to give credibility to his speech. Sade 
elucidates this misunderstanding without really resolving it; and, through 
his spokesmen, he disguises the snares it contains and thus provides the 
Sadean conscience with some elasticity.  
The dose of cruelty with which Nature has more or less furnished 
each individual is no more than the other side of desire with which 
everyone identifies himself, as though he were its only agent, in the 
moment of initial awareness of t he self. For at that point the impulse to 
cruelty endangers him with destruction just as he endangers others.  
The man who asks: what are all the earth’s creatures when measured 
against the least of my desires? is already the victim of the 
misunderstanding,  the plaything of an impulse which raises questions about itself. He is individuated but he resents his individuation. The 
impulse of desire can lend its absolute character to the individual who, as 
his part of the bargain, lends his language to desire whi ch has no 
language. Language borrows desire’s violence because violence is scarce 
in the individual who suffers as much from its lack as he would like to 
see the other suffer. The result is that he turns against the other the 
challenge which had been direc ted against him: Let us have the strength to 
renounce what we expect from others.  The formula permits a rupture which 
compensates his rhetorical solipsism by bringing back into question his awareness of himself.  
With this as his point of departure, Sade at tempts to find an outlet for 
the necessity to destroy by a negation of destruction; his concept of a Nature who destroys her own works  now identifies destruction with the 
purity of desire. This is the proposal contained in his theory of apathy 
whose therap eutic value is in its capacity to provoke the renunciation of 
the other’s reality, but as a consequence, of his own reality too.  
The practice of apathy, as it is suggested by Sade’s characters, 
presupposed that what we call soul, conscience, sensitivity, h eart, are only 
miscellaneous structures brought about by a concentration of the same 
driving forces. Under pressure from the world of others, these forces can transform the faculties into intimidating influences; but just as readily, 
when under pressure fr om our own inner drives, they can become 
subversive influences; in either instance, their reaction is immediate. 
What remains constant is the fact that our own inner forces intimidate 
us at the very moment that they make insurgents out of us.  
Blot out your  soul…try to find pleasure in everything that 
alarms your heart; arrive quickly…at the perfection of this brand of stoicism; in apathy you will discover a whole host of new pleasures which are delectable in a way quite different from 
those you think are fo und in the source of your fatal sensitivity. 
On the basis of my errors, I have established principles; since that time, I have known felicity.  
How does this intimidating insurrection, or this insurrectional 
intimidation, work its way in us? By images which , seen before we act, 
incite us either to act or to suffer acts, and also by images of acts which, 
already committed, come back to us and rekindle the conscience; the 
conscience they rekindle is, of course, that faculty as it has been 
reconstructed by dorm ant drives:  
On one side there is the impossibility of reparations, and on the 
other the impossibility of figuring out which we should have the 
greater repentance for. Conscience grows dizzy and is so silent as to make us capable of extending crime beyond t he limits of 
life. This condition indicates that conscience has a very special quality when compared with the other moods of the soul: it can annihilate itself because its operations have been amplified.  
Yet elsewhere Sade observes that the same is true of  sensitivity: “Any 
extension of it leads to its annihilation.” That observation confirms him in his belief that the same drives are at work in both structures, working 
either to intimidate or to subvert. Thus our awareness of ourself and of 
others is the m ost fragile and the most transparent of functions. As soon 
as our impulses intimidate us by creating fear or remorse, either on the 
basis of images of actions performed or actions still to be undertaken, we must substitute acts of any kind each time the im ages seem on the verge 
of becoming substitutes for acts or a hindrance to our performing them. 
Thus Juliette is encouraged  …to do in cold blood the same things which, done in frenzy, are 
capable of making us remorseful. By doing this we deal from 
strength each time virtue shows her head again, and this habit 
of molesting her in a positive way, at the moment when a 
certain calm in the senses seems to make her reappearance 
possible and desirable, is one of the surest ways of annihilating 
her forever. Use this  secret, it is infallible; as soon as a moment 
of calm produces virtue in the guise of remorse —and that is 
always the guise she uses in order to recapture us —as soon as 
that happens, immediately do the thing you were thinking about with regret …. 
How can th is practice of apathy become a viable method for the 
achievement of “voluptuous toughness”? Nothing would seem more contradictory in Sade than this break with others when the result of the 
abolition of our duties toward others and their consequent exclusion 
from our sensitivity is translated clearly and constantly by acts which, 
because of their violence, need the other —acts which by their very 
nature re- establish the reality of the other and of myself.  
If the other is no longer anything for me, and if I am  nothing for the 
other, how can these acts be performed since, in effect, they would turn 
out to be the acts of a nothing on a nothing? 
In order that this nothing never again be filled by my reality and the 
reality of the other, through the presence either  of enjoyment or of 
remorse, I must disappear in an endless reiteration of acts which I run 
the danger of regretting because, when they are suspended, the reality of 
the other imposes itself on me once again. I also run the risk of 
overestimating them beca use of the enjoyment they bring me. The risk is there once I take credit for that enjoyment or that regret, or once I give 
credit for it to the other who may be its source.  
Saint -Fond, the perfect type of the perverse libertine who has not got 
beyond the s tage of negative feeling for his fellow men, fails in his 
fidelity to this necessity by allowing his victim as much reality as he 
allows himself. In effect, his conscience is intimidated by its own 
impulses; only this can explain his wish to pursue his vic tim—always the 
same victim—throughout eternity. His self -awareness functions in terms 
of the awareness he continues to have of his victim’s self- awareness in 
moments of suffering, a self- awareness which makes the victim an 
accomplice in the delights of the  torturer.  
What is the purpose behind this reiteration of similar acts which is 
dictated by the moral attitude of apathy? Sade clearly understood the difficulty even in those moments when he was unable to resolve the 
dilemma: the enjoyment which negative c ontact with the other procures 
for me should be anticipated quite as much as remorse. Remorse here is 
only the other side of enjoyment, and the two are only different forms of 
behavior which have their sources in the same drives. Henceforth acts 
should not  be informed by that enjoyment which is procured by the 
particular qualities of a single “victim,” but only by the negation of the 
object which provokes such acts. And in order that this reiteration may 
validate a negation of destruction itself—to a point where it is emptied of all content —the number of reiterated acts and the quantity of 
sacrificed objects become of capital importance. Quantity depreciates the value of objects; quantity undermines my reality and that of the other. 
Thus the moral principle of apathy, which provokes the greatest 
disturbance in the drives, tries to create a coincidence of the disturbance 
with an equally strong wariness designed to guarantee the purity of the disturbance. If the habit of apathy is to render the individual capable of 
doing in cold blood acts which would have brought remorse when done 
in a moment of frenzy, a similar process could be found for vice; with the 
result that virtue would never have a chance to make us remorseful. “In virtue’s name you will no longer conceive of repenting, because you will 
have grown accustomed to doing evil in answer to virtue’s reappearance, 
and in order to do evil no longer you would prevent her from ever appearing ….” 
Could this be the solution to the dialectical drama visible in the 
Sadean conscience? The answer depends on an answer to a more difficult question: Can the conscience of Sadean man accept any solution? To get 
beyond the notion of evil, which is always conditioned by the degree of 
reality he accords to others, we have seen  Sadean man carry the 
exaltation of the ego to its height; yet the height of this exaltation was 
supposed to be found in apathy where the ego abolished itself 
simultaneously with the other, where enjoyment disassociated itself from destruction, and where d estruction identified itself with desire in its pure 
form. In this way, the Sadean conscience reproduces in its own 
operations the perpetual motion of nature which creates but which, in 
creating, sets up obstacles for herself. The only way she recovers her  
liberty, even momentarily, is by destroying her own works.  
—T
RANSLATED BY JOSEPH H. MCMAHON  Part Two  
from Les Crimes de l'AmourR
eflections on the Novel (1800) 
In the Year VIII of the Republic (1800), S ade published a four -volume work 
which he entitled Les Crimes de l’Amour and for which he wrote an 
introductory text,  Idée sur les romans. This discursive essay contains much 
which, a hundred and fifty years later, may seem naive and, considering its 
autho r, a trifle conventional. It is none the less a remarkable essay, as Edmund 
Wilson has rightfully noted,  “in which he [Sade] shows a comprehensive 
knowledge of the history of European fiction from the Greek romances through Boccaccio, Cervantes, Mme. de La Fayette, Marivaux, Richardson and 
Fielding, to Monk Lewis and Mrs. Radcliffe (who figures as ‘Radgliffe’). He 
lays down some excellent principles, all of which he has more or less violated: 
that the novelist must not depart from what is probable; that he must not interrupt his story with incidents that are either too frequent or not properly 
related to the subject; that it should never be the author who moralizes but 
always one of the characters in his novel, and that he ought not even then to be made to e xcept when he is forced to by circumstances .”
1  
Sade came to writing relatively late in life. Although the recent discovery of 
his miscellaneous works (Œuvres diverses) reveals that his initial literary 
efforts date from a period much earlier than was origi nally thought, these  are 
1 Edmund Wilson:  The Bit Between My Teeth, A Literary Chronicle of 1950 –
1965. New York, Farrar, Straus and Giroux,  1965, p. 206.  none the less the works of a dilettante, and it is not unreasonable to assume 
that Sade, had he remained a free man throughout his life, might never have 
become a writer. Prison fettered the libertine; it made the writer.  
Sade scho lars Maurice Heine and Gilbert Lely both date the birth of Sade 
the writer as approximately 1780, two years after his incarceration in cell No. 
6 of the Vincennes prison. “It was around 1780, in the course of his fortieth 
year, that the prisoner of the Roy al dungeons began his gigantic labor as a 
writer. As Maurice Heine notes, Sade found salvation in his writing, which 
he came to look upon as the purpose of his life .”2  
Sade was not a man of half measures, and when he turned to writing he 
devoted himself t o it with the same total dedication he had earlier shown in 
his pursuit of libertine pleasures. His letters from prison abound with requests 
for and judgments upon literary and philosophical works: “To refuse me Jean -
Jacques’  Confessions, now there’s an ex cellent thing, above all after having 
sent me Lucretius and the dialogues of Voltaire; that demonstrates great judiciousness, profound discernment in your spiritual guides. Alas, they do me 
much honor in reckoning that the writings of a deist can be danger ous reading 
for me; would that I were still at that stage.” Thus Sade to his wife, in 1783 .
3 
When the Bastille was stormed in 1789 and Sade’s former cell sacked —he had 
been removed ten days before to the Charenton Asylum at the request of the 
Bastille auth orities, who accused him of inciting the populace to revolt4—the 
2 Gilbert Lely:  La Vie du Marquis de Sade,  Vol. II. Paris, Librairie Gallimard, 1957, 
p. 277.  
3 See The Marquis de Sade:  The Complete Justine, Philosophy in the Bedroom, and 
Other Writings.  New York, Grove Press, 1965, p. 133.  
4 The Bastille logbook, in its entry for July 2, 1789, notes: “The Count de Sade 
shouted several times from the window of the Bastille that the prisoners were being 
slaughtered and that the people should come to liberate them.”  (Ibid.,  p. 100.)                                           rioters discovered, and looted, Sade’s prison library of some six hundred 
volumes, “several of which were of great  value.”5 Having dedicated himself to 
literature, Sade, in prison, became a v oracious reader and student of 
literatures past and present. His “Reflections on the Novel” reveals the extent of his reading, and if his judgments are not invariably accurate, his literary 
perception is often acute, as is demonstrated by his preference fo r the English 
novelists Fielding and Richardson as opposed to the “fastidious portraits of 
love’s sighs” and the “tedious bedside conversations” of the French novelists of 
the period.  
Notable by its absence from Sade’s essay on fiction is any mention of 
Choderlos de Laclos’  Les Liaisons dangereuses. It cannot be supposed that 
Sade was unfamiliar with that novel, given the immense success it had 
enjoyed following its publication in 1782—a success none of Sade’s work would ever attain, at least during the aut hor’s lifetime. Gilbert Lely has 
uncovered evidence to show that Sade and Laclos spent seven months together 
in the same prison —La maison de Santé at Picpus— from the end of March 
to the middle of October, 1794. From Sade’s subsequent silence concerning 
Laclos’ novel, Lely suggests that the two men may have quarreled during their 
term in Picpus together. The more likely hypothesis is that Sade was, purely 
and simply, jealous of Laclos —jealous perhaps of his popular success, but 
doubtless even more because he  must have realized (his essay on the novel is too 
astute for him not to have known it) that Laclos had written a veritable 
masterpiece of cynicism and evil. Sade’s notebooks contain a  Plan d’un roman 
en lettres (“Outline for an epistolary novel”) which is  suspiciously reminiscent 
of Les Liaisons dangereuses and lends credence to the theory that Sade 
5 Lely,  op. cit., Vol. II , p. 349.                                           regarded Laclos as a rival who had, in Lely’s words, “encroached upon a 
domain he deemed to be exclusively his own.”  
“Reflections on the Novel” also provides e vidence of another literary rivalry, 
that between Sade and Restif de la Bretonne, a writer Sade loathed. The sentiment was mutual.  It was Restif who first referred to Sade as the 
“monster -author” and who, as an act of revenge against the popularity of  
Justine, wrote a novel entitled  Anti-Justine. Unlike Sade’s book, noted 
Restif, his was one “which wives can read to their husbands,” a work which 
will make the reader “adore women, cherish them, and loathe all the more the 
vivisector who has just been release d from the Bastille.” Sade in turn assailed 
Restif for being a lowly hack who wrote with such speed, in the base pursuit of 
money, that he had to keep a printing press at the head of his bed.  
On 30 Vendémiaire, Year IX (the 22nd of October, 1800), the crit ic 
Villeterque published a review of  Les Crimes de l’Amour in which he 
violently attacked the stories themselves, the essay which served as an 
introduction, and the author, whom he implicitly accused of being the author of the anonymously published  Justine . Sade was not one to allow such an 
indictment or such innuendos to go unanswered; his reply appeared in the form 
of a pamphlet issued by Sade’s publisher Massé in the Year XI (1803). Because 
of their historical and intrinsic interest, and because the Villeterque- Sade 
dialogue forms a logical appendix to the essay itself, we have included both in 
the present volume.  
“A note on the cover of the twentieth and final notebook of his autograph 
manuscript,” writes Maurice Heine, “informs us that Sade’s work in th e form 
of the novella and short story consists of fifty tales. Sixteen of these, among the shorter or at least the more anecdotal, were intended to be classed as  
Historiettes and included as part of a two -or three -volume collection of essays 
entitled  Le Po rtefeuille d’un homme de lettres. Thirty more, so arranged that the somber stories would alternate with the gay, were destined to comprise 
a four- volume work, with a preface by the author, entitled  Contes et 
Fabliaux du XVIIIe siècle, par un troubadour pro vençal.”6 All this 
material was written in the Bastille during the years 1787 and 1788, and is 
thus subsequent to the composition of  The 120 Days of Sodom.  
We find in the manuscript of the projected  Contes et Fabliaux du XVIIIe 
siècle the following descrip tion of the work in Sade’s hand:  
This work comprises four volumes, with an engraving for each tale; 
these short tales are interspersed in such a manner that an adventure 
which is gay, and even naughty but well within the limits of modesty and decency, will  follow immediately upon a serious or tragic 
adventure ….
7  
Twelve years later, in the Year VIII, Sade published his collection as  Les 
Crimes de l’Amour in which, abandoning his original plan to alternate the 
somber with the gay, he included only the “serio us or tragic.” An article on the 
work which appeared in the  Journal de Paris on 6 Brumaire, Year IX (the 
28th of October, 1800) —thus barely a week after Villeterque’s attack —
speculated on the reason for the change in contents. Commenting first upon the 
“fecundity of the author’s imagination” and the “great variety of situations 
portrayed,” the author of the unsigned review went on to observe: “He [Sade] 
6 Maurice Heine:  Le Marquis de Sade.  Paris, Librairie Gallimard, 1950, pp. 262 –262. 
Heine relates the fate of the four remaining stories: “One (Les Filous)was reserved for 
possible inclusion in another work; another  (Les Infortunes de la vertu)  was expanded 
into a novel; and the two others  (Séide, conte moral et philosophique  and l’Epoux 
complaisant) were suppressed by the author.”  
7 D.-A.-F. de Sade:  Historiettes, Contes et Fabliaux/Dorci.  Paris, Jean -Jacques 
Pauvert, 1957.                                           doubtless thought that his somber hue was better suited to us now and for some 
time to come, since in thi s realm [of tragedy] reality still continues to surpass 
fiction .”8  
Of the thirty stories Sade had planned to include in his  Contes et Fabliaux 
du XVIIIe siècle, only eleven were retained in  Les Crimes de l’Amour. One 
of these,  Eugénie de Franval, has alre ady appeared in our earlier volume of 
Sade’s writings. In the present volume we include two others:  Florville and 
Courval, or The Works of Fate and  Ernestine, A Swedish Tale. The 
latter tale will be found in  Part Four, together with the play  Oxtiern, or Th e 
Misfortunes of Libertinage, which was adapted from it. Florville and 
Courval is rightly ranked by Lely as among the best of Sade’s shorter fiction, 
on a par with  Eugénie de Franval. This is the story which especially offended 
and incensed Villeterque, fo r in it Sade, relying upon coincidence —or fate —to 
a degree unusual even for him, renders the heroine guilty of a series of crimes as 
heinous as they are involuntary. Pierre Klossowski has commented judiciously 
on this tale:  
To her future husband, Florville  appears an honest and sincere 
young woman who seems bent on clarifying her strangely burdened past …. Not only does Monsieur de Courval not seem 
jealous of those who have happened to precede him in his intended 
wife’s affections, but is, one might say, imm ersed in a kind of 
trance from which he slowly awakens. This unconsciousness has its 
meaning: Courval seeks happiness in conjugal life —in oblivion, 
actually. He too is guilty; that is the true source of his sympathy for Florville. When she completes her co nfession, everything seems to 
arrange itself: Courval, described to us at the beginning as a man 
8 Lely:  op. cit., Vol. II, p. 564.                                           who asks for nothing more than a mild, peaceful calm in wedded 
life, is only anxious to conclude his marriage in all haste —thanks, 
it would seem, to the scabro us adventures of his fiancée. It is 
evident that, under the cover of exceptional generosity, Courval incarnates that Sadean satisfaction derived from possessing 
Florville’s apparently unveiled secret; but actually, Sadean 
suspicion is incarnated in the her oine. Florville is an enigma to 
herself, quite as the human spirit is at the start of its itinerary, 
before being able to know itself as only God knows it. The author’s demon lodges itself in Florville and proceeds to possess her until she is at last expos ed to herself for what she is.
9  
  
9 Pierre Klossowski:  Sade mon prochain.  Paris, Éditions du Seuil, 1947.                                            
Reflections on the Novel  
We give the name “novel” to any work of imagination fashioned from 
the most uncommon adventures which men experience in the course of their lives.  
But why is this kind of literary work called a novel?
1  
Amongst what people did the novel originate, and what are the most 
famous examples that history has to offer?  
And, finally, what are the rules one must follow in order to succeed in 
perfecting the art of writing the novel?  
These are the three ques tions we propose to discuss.  
Let us begin with the etymology of the word. There being no trace of 
this term, as it relates to this type of composition, amongst the peoples 
of antiquity, we must, it would seem to me, concentrate upon 
1 The English term “novel” derives from the French  nouvelle  (short story) and the 
Latin  novellus,  the diminutive of  novus (new). But Sade, in his etymological and 
historic al ruminations, is referring of course to the French equivalent, that is to the 
term roman.  It might have made more sense, in translating, to use the English 
“romance,” a cognate of the word around which Sade theorizes. But in English this 
word has become too colored, and limited to a certain type of frivolous fiction. Throughout this essay, therefore, for Sade’s roman  the term “novel” has been used. —
Tr.                                          discovering how the ter m, which we still use today, first came into our 
language.  
The “Romance” language was, as we know, a mixture of Celtic and 
Latin,2 in use under the first two dynasties of our kings.3 It is reasonable 
to assume that the works of the kind to which we are referring, written 
in this language, must have borne the same name, and the term une 
romane  must have been used to describe a work in which the emphasis is 
upon amorous adventures, as the term romance  was used to describe 
ballads or lays of the same type. All efforts to discover any other 
etymological origin for this word come to naught; as common sense 
offers no alternative, it would seem simplest to adopt the above.  
Let us move on then to the second question.  
Amongst what people did the novel originate, and what are the most 
famous examples history has to offer?  
The novel is generally thought to have originated with the Greeks, 
from whom it passed over to the Moors and thence to the Spaniards, who subsequently transmitted it to our troubadours. And they in turn 
passed it on to our courtly storytellers.  
Although I respect this theory of the novel’s line of descent, and 
although there are even parts of it I subscribe to, I none the less can in no wise adopt it literally. Is it not, in fact, difficult to accept without 
reservation in an era when travel was so infrequent and communication so sporadic? There are customs, habits, and tastes which cannot be 
transmitted; inherent in all men, they are a part of man’s make -up at 
2 Actually, the various Romance languages retain in general only a few words and 
expressions from the la nguage native to each region prior to the advent of the Latin. 
In French, less than a hundred words can be traced back to the Celtic. —Tr.  
3 That is, the Merovingian and the Carolingian. —Tr.                                           birth. Wherever man exists, inevitable tra ces of these customs, habits, 
and tastes can be discovered.  
Let there be no doubt about it: it was in the countries which first 
recognized gods that the novel originated; and, to be more specific, in 
Egypt, the cradle of all divine worship. No sooner did m an begin to 
suspect  the existence of immortal beings than he endowed them with 
both actions and words. Thereafter we find metamorphoses, fables, parables, and novels: in a word, we find works of fiction as soon as 
fiction seized hold of the minds of men. T hus we find fabulous works of 
imagination the moment it becomes a question of imaginary creatures: 
when whole nations, at first guided by priests, after having slaughtered 
each other in the name of their chimerical divinities, later take up arms 
for their king or their country, the homage offered to heroism counterbalances the tribute paid to superstition; not only do they then 
most rightly substitute these new heroes for their gods, but they also sing 
their warriors’ praises as once they had sung the prais es of heaven; they 
embroider upon the great feats of their lives, or, weary of relating tales 
about them, they create new characters who resemble them …who 
surpass them, and soon new novels appear, doubtless more probable and 
far more suitable for man than were those tales that extolled naught but phantoms. Hercule,
4 the mighty captain, having valiantly to do battle 
against his enemies: this is the historical hero; Hercules, destroying 
monsters, cleaving in twain giants: that is the god …the fable, and the 
origin of superstition; but of reasonable superstition, since its only basis 
4 Hercule  is a generic name, made up of two Celtic words,  Her-Coule,  which means 
Sir-Captain.  Hercoule  was the name given to a general in the army, and thus there 
were a goodly number of  Hercoules.  Mythology subsequently attributed the amazing 
feats of several to one. (See Histoire des Celtes,  by Peloutier.)                                           is the reward for heroism, the gratitude due to the liberators of a nation, 
whereas the superstition that invents uncreated and never perceived 
beings has no other motive behind it than to provoke fear and hope, and 
to unsettle the mind.  
Every people, therefore, has its gods, its demigods, its heroes, its true 
stories, and its fables; some part of it, as we have just seen, can have a solid basis in fact, as it pertains to the heroes;  all the rest is pure fantasy, 
incredible; it is all a work of pure invention, a novel, because the gods 
spoke only through the medium of men who, more or less interested in 
this ridiculous artifice, did not fail to make up the language of phantoms, from whatever they imagined would be most likely to seduce or terrify, 
and, consequently, from whatever was most incredible. “ ’Tis common 
knowledge,” said the scholar Huet, “that the term ‘novel’ was once 
applied to history, and that it was later applied to fict ion, all of which is 
proof positive that the one derived from the other.”  
There were, therefore, novels written in every language and in every 
country of the world, the events and styles of which were modeled both 
after the customs of the country and opinions commonly held therein.  
Man is prey to two weaknesses, which derive from his existence and 
characterize it. Wheresoever on earth he dwells, man feels the need to 
pray,  and to love:  and herein lies the basis for all novels. Man has written 
novels in orde r to portray beings whom he implored;  he has written 
novels to sing the praises of those whom he loves.  The former, dictated 
by terror or hope, must have been somber, full of exaggeration, untruths, 
and fictions, such as those that Esdras composed during t he Babylonian 
captivity. The latter are full of niceties and sentiments, as typified by 
Heliodorus’ Aethiopica,  a love story about Theagenes and Charicleia. But 
as man prayed,  and as he loved,  wheresoever he dwelled on the face of the earth, there were nov els, that is, works of fiction, which at times 
depicted the fanciful objects of his worship, and at times those more 
concrete objects of his love.  
One should therefore refrain from trying to trace the source of this 
kind of writing back to one nation in pr eference to another; one should 
be persuaded by what we have just said that all nations have more or less 
employed this form, depending upon the greater or lesser predilection they have had either for love or for superstition.  
Let us cast a cursory glance now at those nations which have been 
most receptive to works of fiction, and at the works themselves and those who have written them. Let us follow the line down to our own 
day, in order to allow our readers to be in a position to make their own 
comparisons.  
The earliest novelist whereof antiquity speaks is Aristeides of Miletus, 
but none of his work remains extant. All we know is that his prose romance was called Milesian Tales . A reference in the preface of The 
Golden Ass  seems to indicate that Aristeides ’ works were licentious: “I am 
going to write in this same manner,” says Apuleius, in the beginning of 
The Golden Ass.  
Antonius Diogenes, a contemporary of Alexander, wrote in a more 
polished style in The Loves of Dinias and Dercillis,  a novel full of 
fabrications, charms, and spells, of voyages, and of most remarkable 
adventures —a work that le Seurre copied in 1745, in a short, even more 
extraordinary work; for, not content to take his heroes through familiar 
lands, as had Diogenes, le Seurre at times take s them to the moon, and 
at times down into the bowels of hell.  
Next come the loves of Rhodanes and Sinonis, written by Iamblichus 
of Syria; the loves of Theagenes and Charicleia which we have already mentioned; Xenophon’s Cyropaedia;  the loves of Daphnis a nd Chloë, by 
Longus; the loves of Ismene and Ismenia; and a whole host of others, 
some translated, others totally forgotten today.  
The Romans, more critically minded and more given to spite and 
malice than to love and prayer, confined themselves to a few w orks of 
satire, such as those by Petronius and Varro, which should in no wise be 
classed as novels.  
The Gauls, more inclined to these two weaknesses, had their bards, 
whom we can consider as the first novelists in that part of Europe wherein we dwell today . The occupation of these bards, says Lucan, was 
to render in verse the immortal acts of their nation’s heroes, and to sing 
them to the accompaniment of an instrument which resembled a lyre; 
very few of these works have come down to us today.  
Then we have the words and deeds of Charlemagne, attributed to 
Archbishop Turpin of Reims, and all the tales of the Round Table —
Tristram, Lancelot, Perceval —all written with a view toward 
immortalizing known heroes or inventing others modeled after them but 
who, embellished by the imagination, surpass them by the wonderment 
of their deeds. But what a great gulf separates these long, boring, and 
superstition- laden works from the Greek novels which had preceded 
them! What barbarity, what coarseness followed after those ta steful and 
pleasing works of fiction whereof the Greeks had given us the models; 
for though there were doubtless others before them, these are the earliest 
with which we are familiar today.  
The troubadours were next to appear, and although we ought to clas s 
them as poets rather than as novelists, the multitude of agreeable tales in prose that they composed is none the less reason enough for us to grant 
them a rightful place amongst the writers of whom we are speaking. Let anyone who doubts this claim cast h is eyes upon their fabliaux —written 
in the Romance language during the reign of Hugh Capet5—which Italy 
hastened to emulate.  
This beautiful part of Europe, still groaning beneath the yoke of the 
Saracens and still far removed in time from that period when she was to 
become the birthplace of the Renaissance in the arts, boasted almost no 
novelists prior to the tenth century. They appeared more or less at the same time as did our troubadours in France, and indeed imitated them. 
But let us be quite candid conc erning this glory: it was not the Italians 
who became our masters in this art, as Laharpe contends (page 242, vol. 
III), but, on the contrary, on our own soil in France that they received 
their training: ’twas  at the school of our troubadours that Dante, 
Boccaccio, Tasso, and even to some degree Petrarch, sketched out their 
compositions; almost all of Boccaccio’s tales can be found as well in our own fabliaux.  
The same cannot be said for the Spanish, versed in the art of fiction 
by the Moors, who themselves  derived it from the Greeks, having the 
entire body of Greek fiction translated into Arabic; they wrote delightful 
novels, much imitated by our writers; of which more later.  
As gallantry took on a new aspect in France, the novel improved, and 
’twas  then, that is to say at the beginning of the previous century, that 
Honoré d’Urfé wrote his novel Astrée,  which led us to prefer —and most 
deservedly so —his charming shepherds of the Lignon to those foolish 
knights of the eleventh and twelfth centuries. From that time forth, the rage to emulate seized all those whom Nature had endowed with a taste 
5 Founder, i n 978 A.D., of the Capetian dynasty, the third dynasty of French kings 
which ruled, through fourteen kings in direct succession, until 1328. —Tr.                                           for this kind of writing. The astonishing success of Astrée,  which was still 
being widely read midway through the present century, had completely 
captured people’s fancie s, and the work was widely imitated, though 
never improved upon. Gomberville, La Calprenède, Desmarets, and 
Scudéry all thought to surpass the original by substituting princes and 
kings for the Lignon shepherds, and they slipped back into the error 
which t heir model had managed to avoid. Scudéry’s sister made the same 
mistake as her brother: like him, she wanted to ennoble d’Urfé’s manner 
and style and, like her brother, she substituted boring heroes for 
charming shepherds. Instead of portraying, in the per son of Cinna, a 
prince such as Herodotus had painted him, she composes an Artamène 
more insane than all the characters in Astrée,  a lover who can do naught 
but weep from morn till night, and whose languors, instead of becoming 
an object of interest to us, only tax our patience. The same drawbacks in 
her Clélie,  wherein she endows the Romans, whom she badly distorts, 
with all the absurd qualities of the models she was following, which have 
never been better depicted.  
If I may be permitted to go back for a mo ment, I should like to keep 
the promise I made to take a cursory look at Spain.  
To be sure, if knighthood had served as a source of inspiration for our 
novelists, to what extent had it not also influenced writers on the other side of the Pyrenees? The cont ents of Don Quixote’s library, amusingly 
catalogued by Miguel Cervantes, clearly demonstrate it; but, however 
that may be, the renowned author of the memoirs of the greatest 
madman that any novelist has ever conceived most certainly has no rival 
worthy of the name. His immortal work, known throughout the world, 
translated into every language, and perforce considered the foremost 
novel ever written, doubtless possesses, more than any other novel, the art of storytelling, of blending agreeably the various adv entures, and 
especially of being edifying and amusing. “This book,” said Saint -
Evremond, “is the only one I reread without getting bored, and the only 
book I should like to have written.” The twelve stories by the same author, highly interesting and full of wit and refinement, definitely place 
this renowned Spanish novelist in the front rank; without him we might 
possibly not have had either Scarron’s charming work or the greatest part of Lesage’s.  
After d’Urfé and his imitators, after the Ariadnes and the Cleopatras, 
the Pharamonds and the Polixandres —all those works, in short, wherein 
the hero, after languishing throughout nine volumes, was happy indeed 
to marry in the tenth —after, I say, all this hodgepodge unintelligible 
today, there appeared Madame de L a Fayette who, albeit beguiled by the 
languorous tone she found in the works of her predecessors, none the 
less shortened them considerably. And in becoming more concise she 
became more interesting. It has been said that, because she was a woman (as though  this sex, naturally more delicate, more given to writing 
novels, could not aspire in the realm of fiction to many more laurels than 
we), it has been claimed, I say, that Madame de La Fayette was aided a 
great deal, and was able to write her novels only wi th the help of La 
Rochefoucauld with what regards the reflections and of de Segrais with 
what regards the style; be that as it may, there is nothing more interesting than Zayde, nor any work more agreeably written than La 
Princesse de Clèves.  Gracious and charming lady, though the graces may 
have held your brush, is love not sometimes allowed to guide it?  
Fénelon appeared on the scene and thought to make his mark by 
poetically offering guidance to sovereigns who never paid him any heed. Voluptuous lover of Guyon, your soul had need to love, your mind felt the need to paint; if only you had forsaken pedantry or your pride in 
teaching kings how one ought to rule, we would have had from your pen 
more than one masterpiece, rather than a single book which no one 
reads any longer. The same cannot be said for you, delightful Scarron: till the end of time, your immortal novel will provoke laughter, your 
scenes will never grow old or outdated. Telemachus, who had but one 
century to live, will perish beneath the ruins of this century which already is no more; and your actors from Le Mans, gracious and beloved 
child of madness, will amuse even the most serious readers, so long as 
men shall dwell upon the face of the earth.  
Toward the end of the same century, the daughter  of the celebrated 
Poisson (Madame de Gomez), penned works in a manner far different from the writers of her own sex who had preceded her, but they were no less pleasant; and her Journées amusantes,  as well as her Cents nouvelles,  
will, despite their short comings, always form the nucleus of the library 
for those who enjoy this kind of writing. Gomez understood her art, ’twould  be impossible to refuse her this rightful encomium. 
Mademoiselle de Lussan, Mesdames de Tencin and de Graffigny, Elie 
de Beaumont, a nd Riccoboni vied with her; their writings, full of 
refinement and taste, are most assuredly an honor to their sex. De 
Graffigny’s Lettres d’une Péruvienne  will always remain a model of 
tenderness and sentiment, and those of Mylady Catesby, by Riccoboni, 
could serve eternally as a model to those who aspire to naught but grace 
and lightness of touch.  
But let us return to the century we left, urged on by the desire to 
render homage to the gracious women who held sway in this kind of 
writing, wherefrom the men could learn most excellent lessons.  The Epicureanism of writers such as Ninon de Lénclos, Marion 
Delorme, the Marquise de Sévigné and the Messieurs La Fare, de 
Chaulieu, de Saint -Evremond —in short of all that charming group 
which, awakening from the languors of the goddess of Cytherea, began 
to come around to Buffon’s opinion “that there is naught that is good in 
love save the physical” —soon changed the tone of the novel.  
The writers who emerged thereafter sensed that earlier insipidities 
would no longer a muse a century perverted by the Regency, a century 
which had recovered from the follies of chivalry, the absurdities of 
religion, and the adoration of women, and which, finding it simpler to amuse or to corrupt these women than to serve them or shower fuls ome 
praise upon them, created scenes, situations, and conversations more in keeping with the spirit of the times: they clothed cynicism and immorality in a pleasant, bantering, and sometimes even philosophical 
style, and at least gave pleasure if they did not edify.  
Crébillon wrote Le Sopha, Tanzaï, Les É garements de coeur et d’esprit,  
etc.—all novels which indulged vice and strayed from virtue but which, 
when they were offered to the public, were greeted with great success.  
Marivaux, more original in his m anner of portraying, and terser in 
style, at least offered convincing characters, captivated the heart and made his public weep. But how, with all that energy, could anyone 
possess a style so precious and mannered? He is proof positive that 
Nature never ac cords the novelist all the gifts required to perfect his art.  
Voltaire’s goal was quite different: having no other purpose in mind 
than to insert philosophy into his novels, he gave up everything else in 
exchange. And with what skill he succeeded in attain ing his goal! And, 
despite all the criticisms, Candide  and Zadig  will always remain pure 
masterpieces!  Rousseau, to whom Nature had granted in refinement and sentiment 
what she had granted only in wit to Voltaire, treated the novel in 
another way altogethe r. What vigor, what energy in La Nouvelle Héloïse!  
While Momus was dictating Candide  to Voltaire, love was etching with 
its flaming torch every burning page of Julie,  and we can safely assert 
that this sublime book will never be bettered; may that truth ca use the 
pen to fall from the hands of that legion of ephemeral writers who, for 
the past thirty years, have continued to pour out poor imitations of that 
immortal original; let them be made to feel that, in order to equal that 
work, they would have to poss ess a fiery soul like Rousseau’s and a 
philosophic mind such as his —two traits Nature does not bring together 
in a single person more than once a century.  
Athwart all that, Marmontel offered us what he called Moral Tales,  
not because he was teaching morali ty (as one esteemed man of letters has 
said), but because the tales portrayed our customs, albeit a trifle too much in the mannered style of Marivaux. What, in fact, do these tales add up to? Puerilities, written solely for women and children, and indeed 
’twould  be hard to conceive that they came from the same hand as 
Bélisaire,  a work which in itself would be enough to assure the author’s 
fame; did he who had written the fifteenth chapter of this book have to aspire to the petty fame of having given us the se rosy -hued tales?  
Finally, the English novels, the vigorous works of Richardson and 
Fielding, arrived to teach the French that ’tis  not by portraying the 
fastidious languors of love or the tedious conversations of the 
bedchamber that one can obtain any s uccess with the novel, but by 
depicting robust and manly characters who, playthings and victims of 
that effervescence of the heart known as love, reveal to us both its 
dangers and its misfortunes; only by so doing can this evolution be shown, this portraya l of passions so carefully traced in the English 
novels. ’Tis Richardson, ’tis Fielding, who have taught us that the 
profound study of man’s heart —Nature’s veritable labyrinth —alone can 
inspire the novelist, whose work must make us see man not only as he i s, 
or as he purports to be—which is the duty of the historian—but as he is 
capable of being when subjected to the modifying influences of vice and 
the full impact of passion. Therefore we must know them all, we must employ every passion and vice, if we wis h to labor in this field. From 
these works we also learn that ’tis  not always by making virtue triumph 
that a writer arouses interest; that we most certainly ought to tend in that direction, insofar as it is possible, but that this rule, which exists 
neith er in Nature nor in the works of Aristotle, is simply one that we 
should like all men to follow for our own sake and happiness, and is in 
no wise essential in the novel, nor is’t even the one most likely to awaken 
the reader’s interest. For when virtue tri umphs, the world is in joint and 
things as they ought to be, our tears are stopped even, as it were, before 
they begin to flow. But if, after severe trials and tribulations, we finally 
witness virtue overwhelmed by vice, our hearts are inevitably rent 
asunder, and the work having moved us deeply, having, as Diderot was 
wont to say, “smitten our hearts in reverse,” must inevitably arouse that 
interest which alone can assure the writer of his laurels.  
Imagine for a moment: if the immortal Richardson, after twelve or 
fifteen volumes, had virtuously  concluded by converting Lovelace, and by 
having him peacefully marry Clarissa, would the reader, when the novel 
was thus turned round, have shed the delightful tears it now wrings from 
every sensitive soul?  
’Tis therefore Nature that must be seized when one labors in the field 
of fiction, ’tis  the heart of man, the most remarkable of her works, and in no wise virtue, because virtue, however becoming, however necessary it 
may be, is yet but one of the many facets of th is amazing heart, whereof 
the profound study is so necessary to the novelist, and the novel, the faithful mirror of this heart, must perforce explore its every fold.  
Learned translator of Richardson, Prévost, you to whom we are 
indebted for having rendered  into our language the beauties of that 
renowned author, do you yourself not also deserve an equal share of praise for your own work? And is’t not only fair and right that you are 
called the French Richardson?  You alone had the ability to hold the 
reader’s  attention for a long period by complex and intricate fables, by 
always sustaining one’s interest though dividing it; you alone were 
sparing enough of your episodes that interest in your main plot waxed 
rather than waned as they grew more numerous and more  complex. 
Thus that multitude of events wherewith Laharpe reproaches you is not 
only the source in your work of the most sublime effects, ’tis  also what 
proves most clearly both the quality of your mind and the excellence of 
your talent. Finally (to add to  our own opinion of Prévost what others 
have thought as well), “Les Mémoires d’un homme de qualité, Cleveland, 
L’Histoire d’une Grecque moderne, Le Monde moral,  and above all Manon 
Lescaut
6 are filled with touching and terrible scenes which invincibly 
affect and involve the reader. The situations in these works, so 
6 What tears one sheds upon reading this delightful work! How beautifully is Nature 
portrayed therein, and how interest is not only sustained but successively heightened! 
How many difficulties are overcome! Think of all the philosophers it would take to 
provoke that interest in a ruined girl. Would it be too much of an exaggeration to dare 
suggest that this work de serves the title of our finest novel? ’Twas therein Rousseau 
saw that, despite imprudences and oversights, a heroine could still manage to touch 
our hearts; and perhaps we would never have had  Julie without Manon Lescaut.                                           beautifully arranged, derive from those moments when Nature shudders 
with horror,” etc. And this, then, is what is called writing a novel; these 
are the qualities which will assure Prévost a post erity his rivals can never 
hope to attain.  
Thereafter follow the writers of the middle of the present century: 
Dorat, as mannered as Marivaux, as cold and amoral as Crébillon, but a 
more pleasing writer than either of the two with whom we have compared him : the frivolity of his century excuses his own, and he had 
the ability to depict it vividly.  
Will the charming author of the Reine de Golconde  allow me to offer 
him a toast to his talent? We have rarely encountered a more agreeable 
wit, and the loveliest t ales of the century are not the equal of the tale 
whereby you gained immortality; at once more charming and more 
felicitous than Ovid, since the Hero- Saviour of France proves, by 
recalling you to the bosom of your country, that he is as much the friend of Apollo as of Mars: respond to the hope of this great man by adding 
yet a few more roses to fair Aline’s breast.  
D’Arnaud, a disciple of Prévost, can often claim to surpass him; both 
dip their pens into the waters of the Styx, but d’Arnaud oft tempers his 
upon the flanks of Elysium. Prévost, more vigorous, never altered the 
tones wherewith he painted Cleveland.  
R***
7 floods the public with his works; he needs a printing press at the 
head of his bed. Fortunately, one press alone will groan beneath the 
weight of his terrible output;  his is a vile, pedestrian style, his adventures 
are disgusting, inevitably taken from the lowest, meanest milieux; a gift 
7 Sade here refers to Restif de la  Bretonne, whom he loathed personally as much as 
he loathed his works. —Tr.                                           of prolixity his sole merit, for which only the pepper merchants are 
grateful to him.  
Perhaps at this point we  ought to analyze these new novels in which 
sorcery and phantasmagoria constitute practically the entire merit: foremost among them I would place The Monk,  which is superior in all 
respects to the strange flights of Mrs. Radcliffe’s brilliant imagination. But that would take us too far afield. Let us concur that this kind of fiction, whatever one may think of it, is assuredly not without merit: 
’twas  the inevitable result of the revolutionary shocks which all of 
Europe has suffered. For anyone familiar with  the full range of 
misfortunes wherewith evildoers can beset mankind, the novel became as 
difficult to write as monotonous to read. There was not a man alive who 
had not experienced in the short span of four or five years more misfortunes than the most cel ebrated novelist could portray in a century. 
Thus, to compose works of interest, one had to call upon the aid of hell itself, and to find in the world of make -believe things wherewith one 
was fully familiar merely by delving into man’s daily life in this a ge of 
iron. Ah! but how many disadvantages there are in this manner of 
writing ! The author of The Monk  has avoided them no more than has 
Mrs. Radcliffe. Here, there are perforce two possibilities: either one 
resorts increasingly to wizardry —in which case t he reader’s interest soon 
flags—or one maintains a veil of secrecy, which leads to a frightful lack 
of verisimilitude. Should this school of fiction produce a work excellent enough to attain its goal without foundering upon one or the other of 
these two reefs, then we, far from denigrating its methods, will be 
pleased to offer it as a model.  
Before broaching our third and final question (“What are the rules 
one must follow in order to succeed in perfecting the art of the novel?”), we must, it would seem to me, reply to the constant objection of certain 
melancholy minds who, to give themselves a gloss of morality wherefrom 
their hearts are often far distant, persist in asking: “Of what use are 
novels?”  
Of what use, indeed! hypocritical and perverse men, for y ou alone ask 
this ridiculous question: they are useful in portraying you as you are, proud creatures who wish to elude the painter’s brush, since you fear the results, for the novel is —if ’tis possible to express oneself thuswise —the 
representation of secu lar customs, and is therefore, for the philosopher 
who wishes to understand man, as essential as is the knowledge of history. For the etching needle of history only depicts man when he 
reveals himself publicly, and then ’tis  no longer he: ambition, pride c over 
his brow with a mask which portrays for us naught but these two 
passions, and not the man. The novelist’s brush, on the contrary, 
portrays him from within…seizes him when he drops this mask, and the 
description, which is far more interesting, is at th e same time more 
faithful. This, then, is the usefulness of novels, O you cold censors who 
dislike the novel: you are like that legless cripple who was wont to say: 
and why do artists bother to paint full- length portraits?  
If ’tis therefore true that the n ovel is useful, let us not fear to outline 
here a few principles which we believe necessary to bring this kind of 
literature to perfection. I realize full well that it is difficult to accomplish this task without supplying my enemies with ammunition they c an use 
against me. Shall I not become doubly guilty of not writing well  if I 
prove that I know how one must proceed in order to write well?  Ah! let 
us put these vain conjectures aside, let us offer them up as sacrifices to 
the love of art.  The most essenti al requirement for the novelist’s art is most certainly 
a knowledge of the human heart. Now, every man of intelligence will 
doubtless second us when we assert that this important knowledge can 
only be acquired through an intimate acquaintance with misfortu ne and 
through travel.  One must have seen men of all nations in order to know 
them well, and one must have suffered at their hands in order to learn how to judge and evaluate them; the hand of misfortune, by ennobling the character of him whom she crushes,  places him at that proper 
perspective from which it is essential to study men; from this perspective, he views them as a traveler perceives the wild waves crashing against the reefs whereon the tempest has tossed him. But no matter 
what the situation wher ein Nature or destiny has placed him, let the 
novelist, would he know the hearts of men, be sparing of his own 
conversation when he is with them. One learns nothing when one 
speaks; one only learns by listening. And that is why the garrulous and 
the gossip s are generally fools.  
O you who wish to venture upon this difficult and thorny career, bear 
ever in mind that the novelist is the child of Nature, that she has created 
him to be her painter; if he does not become his mother’s lover the 
moment she gives bi rth to him, let him never write, for we shall never 
read him. But if he feels that burning need to portray everything, if, with fear and trembling he probes into the bosom of Nature, in search of his 
art and for models to discover, if he possesses the feve r of talent and the 
enthusiasm of genius, let him follow the hand that leads him; once 
having divined man, he will paint him. If his imagination is held in 
check, let him yield to it, let him embellish what he sees: the fool culls a 
rose and plucks its pet als; the man of genius smells its sweet perfume, 
and describes it. This is the man we shall read.  But in counseling you to embellish, I forbid you to stray from 
verisimilitude: the reader has a right to become incensed when he 
observes that the author is a sking too much of him. He can see that he is 
being deceived, his pride is hurt, he no longer believes anything he reads 
the moment he suspects he is being misled.  
What is more, let no barrier restrain you; exercise at will your right to 
attack or take libe rties with any and all of history’s anecdotes, whenever 
the rupture of this restriction demands it in the formation of the 
pleasures you are preparing for us. Once again, we do not ask that you be 
true, but only that you be convincing and credible. To be t oo demanding 
of you would be harmful to the pleasure we expect from you. None the 
less, do not replace the true by the impossible, and let what you invent 
be well said; you shall be forgiven for substituting your imagination for the truth only when this is  done for the express purpose of adorning or 
impressing; one can never be forgiven for expressing oneself poorly when one has complete freedom of expression. If, like R***, you write only what everyone already knows, were you, like him, to give us four vol umes 
a month, better not to put pen to paper at all. No one obliges you to 
exercise this as your profession; but if you undertake it, do it well. Above 
all do not choose it merely as a crutch to your existence; your work will 
reflect your needs, you will t ransmit your weakness into it; it will have 
the pallor of hunger: other professions will offer themselves to you: make 
shoes, but refrain from writing books. We shall not think any the less of you, and since you will not be a source of annoyance to us, we may even 
like you all the more.  
Once you have your outline down on paper, work zealously to enlarge 
and improve upon it, without however respecting the limitations it seems initially to impose upon you: were you to adhere strictly to this method, your work  would be cold and lack breadth. We want outbursts 
from you, flights of fancy rather than rules. Transcend your drafts, vary 
them, elaborate upon them: work is the surest source of inspiration. 
What makes you believe that the inspiration you receive while working is any poorer than that dictated by your outline? Basically, all I ask of you 
is this one thing: to sustain interest throughout, to the very last page. 
You shall miss the mark if you punctuate your tale by incidents either repeated too often or which stray too far afield from the main subject. 
Let those you do make so bold as to indulge in be as well polished as the 
main plot. You must make amends to the reader when you oblige him to leave something which interests him in order to begin a secondary plot. 
He may allow you to interrupt him, but he will not forgive you if you 
bore him or tax his patience. Therefore let your side plots derive from and return to the main plot. If you make your heroes travel, be familiar 
with the country whereto you take t hem, carry your magic to the point 
of identifying me with them; remember that I am walking close beside 
them in every region to which you take them. Remember too that I may 
be better informed than you; I shall not forgive a lack of verisimilitude 
with what  regards customs or a slip with what regards dress, and even 
less an error in geography: as no one compels you to embark upon these 
escapades, ’tis essential that your local color be exact, else you must 
remain back home by your fireside. ’Tis  the only cas e in your work when 
we will not tolerate the make -believe, unless the country you take me to 
be imaginary; and even in that case, I shall always demand verisimilitude.  
Avoid the affectation of moralizing: it has no place in a novel. If the 
characters your plot requires are sometimes obliged to reason, let them 
always do so without affectation, without the pretension of doing so. ’Tis  never the author who should moralize but the character, and even then 
you should only allow him to do so when forced by the c ircumstances.  
When you arrive at the denouement, let it occur naturally, let it never 
be stiff or contrived, but always born of the circumstances. I do not require of you, as do the authors of the Encyclopédie,  that the 
denouement be in accordance with the  wishes of the reader: what 
pleasure is there left to him when he has divined everything? The denouement must be the logical result of a threefold demand: the events 
that lead up to it, the requirements of verisimilitude, and the 
imagination’s inspiration.  And if, then, with these principles wherewith I 
charge your mind, and with your tendency to elaborate, you do not write 
well, you will at least perform better than we.  
For we must confess, in the stories that you are about to read, the 
audacious effort we  have been so bold as to make does not always adhere 
strictly to the rules of the art. But we trust that extreme verisimilitude of 
the characters will perhaps compensate for it. Nature, even stranger than the moralists portray it to us, continually eludes the restricting 
limitations which their policy would like to impose. Uniform in her 
framework, unpredictable in her effects, Nature’s constantly troubled 
bosom resembles the depths of a volcano, whence there rumble forth in 
turn either precious stones serv ing man’s needs or fire balls which 
annihilate them; mighty when she peoples the earth with such as 
Antonius and Titus; frightful when she spews forth an Andronicus or a 
Nero; but always sublime, always majestic, always worthy of our studies, 
of our brush strokes, and of our respectful admiration, because her 
designs are unknown to us, because ’tis  never upon what those designs 
cause us to feel that we, slaves to her whims or needs, should base our feelings toward her, but upon her grandeur, her energy, no matter what 
the results may be.  
As minds grow increasingly corrupt, as a nation grows older, by virtue 
of the fact that Nature is increasingly studied and better analyzed, in order for prejudice to be increasingly eradicated, all these things must be 
made more widely known. This holds equally true for all the arts; ’tis  
only by advancing that any art moves nearer to perfection; the goal can 
only be reached by successive attempts. Doubtless we could not have 
advanced so far in those trying times of ignorance  when, weighed down 
beneath the yoke of religion, whosoever valued the arts risked the 
penalty of death for his efforts; when talent had as its reward the stakes 
of the Inquisition. But in the state wherein we live today, let us always 
start from this prin ciple: when man has weighed and considered all his 
restrictions, when, with a proud look his eyes gauge his barriers, when, 
like the Titans, he dares to raise his bold hand to heaven and, armed 
with his passions, as the Titans were armed with the lavas of Vesuvius, 
he no longer fears to declare war against those who in times past were a 
source of fear and trembling to him, when his aberrations  now seem to 
him naught but errors rendered legitimate by his studies —should we 
then not speak to him with the same fervor as he employs in his own behavior? In a word, is eighteenth -century man therefore identical with 
the man of the eleventh century?  
Let us conclude with a positive reassurance that the stories we are 
presenting today are absolutely new and in no wise a mere reworking of 
already oft -told tales. This quality is perhaps not without some merit in 
an age when everything seems already to have been written, when the sterile imaginations of authors seem incapable of producing anything new, and when the public is offered naught save compilations, extracts, 
and translations.  
Still, we should mention that La Tour enchantée  and La Conspiration 
d’Amboise  have some basis in historical fact. We mention this to show 
the reader, by our candor, how far we are from wishing to deceive him 
on this score. In this type of fiction, one must be original or refrain from 
indulging in it.  
Regarding the one and the other of these two stories, here is what the 
reader will find in the sources indicated below.  
The Arab historian Abul K asim Terif ibn- Tariq, whose work is little 
known amongst our men of letters today, relates the following in 
connection with La Tour enchantée:  “Out of sensual pleasure, the 
effeminate prince Rodrigue enticed to his court his vassals’ daughters, 
and abused them. Amongst them was Florinde, the daughter of Count 
Julian. Rodrigue violated the girl. The girl’s father, who was in Africa, 
learned of the news from a letter, couched in the form of an allegory, sent him by his daughter. He roused the Moors to revolt and returned to 
Spain at the head of a Moorish army. Rodrigue is at a loss what to do: 
his treasury is empty. Hearing there is an immense fortune buried in the 
Enchanted Tower near Toledo, Rodrigue goes there. He enters the 
tower, and there sees a statue o f Time, which strikes with its staff and, 
by means of an inscription, enumerates to Rodrigue the list of 
misfortunes which await him. The prince advances and sees a large tank 
of water, but no money. He retraces his steps and orders the tower to be 
sealed.  The edifice vanishes in a clap of thunder, and not a trace of it 
remains. In spite of the dire predictions, Rodrigue amasses an army, 
wages war for eight days hard by Cordova, and is killed. No trace of his 
body was ever found.”  So much for the historical  facts. If one will now read our work, he will 
see whether or not the multitude of events wherewith we have 
surrounded this dry historical event merits our considering the anecdote 
as properly our own invention.8  
As for La Conspiration d’Amboise,  let the reader consult Garnier and 
he will see how little indebted we are to history in this story.  
No guide has broken ground for us in the other stories: plot, style, 
episodes —all are our own invention. It may be said that these are not 
what is best in our work.  No matter; we have always believed, and we 
shall continue to believe, that ’tis  better to invent, albeit poorly, than to 
translate or copy. The inventor can lay claim to talent or genius, and has 
at least that much in his favor; what claim can the plagiar ist make? I 
know of no baser profession, nor do I conceive of any avowal more 
humiliating than that which such men are obliged to make to 
themselves, namely, that they are totally lacking in wit, since they are 
obliged to borrow the wit of others.  
Regardin g the translator, God forbid that we fail to give him his due. 
But all he does is add to the luster of our rivals; and if only for the honor 
8 This anecdote is the one which opens the Brigandas episode in that section of the 
novel  Aline et Valcour  which bears the title:  Sainville et Léonore,  and interrupts the 
episode of  the body discovered in the tower. Those who have plagiarized this episode 
word for word have likewise not neglected to copy verbatim the first four lines of this 
anecdote, which is spoken by the chief of the Bohemians. It is therefore essential for us her e to point out to those who buy novels that the works currently on sale at 
Pigoreau and Leroux’s bookshop under the title Valmor et Lidia,  and at Clérioux and 
Moutardier’s under the title Alxonde et Koradin,  are absolutely one and the same, and 
both have b een plagiarized verbatim from the  Sainville et Léonore  episode, which 
forms approximately three volumes of my work entitled  Aline et Valcour.                                           of the Nation, were it not best to say to these proud rivals: and we too 
know how to create.  
Finally, I must reply to the reproach leveled at me when Aline et 
Valcour  was published. My brush, ’twas  said, was too vivid. I depict vice 
with too hateful a countenance. Would anyone care to know why? I have 
no wish to make vice seem attractive. Unlike Crébillon and Dorat, I have 
not set myself the dangerous goal of enticing women to love characters who deceive them; on the contrary, I want them to loathe these 
characters. ’Tis the only way whereby one can avoid being duped by 
them. And, in order to succeed in that purpose, I painted that hero who 
treads the path of vice with features so frightful that they will most 
assuredly not inspire either pity or love. In so doing, I dare say, I am 
become more moral than those who believe they have license to embellish them. The pernicio us works by these authors are like those 
fruits from America beneath whose highly polished skins there lurk the seeds of death. This betrayal of Nature, the motive of which ’tis  not 
incumbent upon us to reveal, is not done for man. Never, I say it again, 
never shall I portray crime other than clothed in the colors of hell. I wish 
people to see crime laid bare, I want them to fear it and detest it, and I 
know no other way to achieve this end than to paint it in all its horror. Woe unto those who surround it with roses! their views are far less pure, 
and I shall never emulate them. Given which, let no one any longer ascribe to me the authorship of J ……;
9 I have never written any such 
works, and I surely never shall. They are naught but imbeciles or 
evildoers wh o, despite the authenticity of my denials, can still suspect me 
9 Sade is, of course, alluding to  Justine. —Tr.                                           of being the author of that work, and I shall henceforth use as my sole 
arm against their calumnies the most sovereign contempt.  
  V
illeterque’s Review of  Les Crimes de 
l’Amour1 
A detestable book by a man suspected of having written one even more 
horrible. I do not know, nor do I wish to know, to what extent this 
suspicion has any foundation in fact. A journalist has the right to pass 
judgment on books, and not the right to make accusations. I shall go even further: he ought to feel sorry for him over whose head there hovers 
so terrible a suspicion, until such time as, having been found guilty, he is 
denounced for public execration. 
In a piece entitled “Reflections on the Novel” which serves as a 
preface to Les Crimes de l’Amour,  the author raises three questions, which 
he proposes to answer: Why is this kind of literary work called a “novel”? Amongst what people did the novel originate, and what are the most 
famous examples history has to offer? And, finally, what are the rules 
one must follow if one wishes to succeed in writing well?  
I shall not bother with the first two questions, which have been 
discussed frequently and in suffic ient detail by others, except to remark 
that the author, in discussing these first two questions, makes a great show of his erudition, which is actually riddled with errors, and prates on 
1 This article appeared in Le Journal des Arts, des Sciences, et de  la Littérature  on 30 
Vendémiaire,  Year IX (October 22, 1800), 2º année, No. 90, pp. 281–284.—Tr.  irrelevantly about them at great length. I shall move on to what he calls, 
with respect to the novel, “perfecting the art of writing.”  
“It is not,” says the author, “by making virtue triumph that we arouse 
interest. This is no wise essential in the novel. Nor is’t even the rule most likely to arouse interest on the part of the reader. For when virtue 
triumphs, the world being in joint and things as they ought to be, our tears cease to flow even, as it were, before they have begun. But if, after severe trials and tribulations, we finally witness ‘virtue overwhelmed by 
vice,’ our hearts are inevitably rent asunder and, the work having moved 
us deeply, it must indubitably arouse the interest which alone can assure 
a writer of his laurels.”  
Is this not tantamount to reducing into principles the plot of the 
infamous work which th e author disclaims? Do we not run the risk, by 
simply repudiating and disassociating ourselves from the notoriety 
connected with the execrable form of this work, do we not run the risk 
of seeming to embrace its basic premises, which in the final analysis a re 
none other than to portray “virtue overwhelmed by vice”?  
Why else would anyone paint scenes in which crime reigns 
triumphant? Such scenes awaken evil tendencies in the wicked; from the 
virtuous man, who is ever steadfast in his principles, they provoke cries 
of indignation; and in him whose heart is willing but whose flesh is 
weak, they incite despondent tears. These horrible portraits of crime do not even serve the purpose of rendering crime more odious; therefore, 
they are both useless and dangerous. T hese calamitous principles are so 
patently false that even those persons who subscribe to them in private 
disown them in public.  
In the tale entitled Eugénie de Franval,  the author declares:  By leaving [crime] in the darkness it seeks, have we not as it 
were annihilated it? Scandal noised abroad is certain scandal, 
and the recital of it awakens the passions of those who are inclined toward the same kind of crime.  
Here we see the author contradicting his own views, a not uncommon 
practice when one holds to e rroneous opinions.  
I was unable to read these four volumes, full of the most revolting 
atrocities, without a feeling of indignation. Nor does the author’s style in 
any wise compensate the reader for the disgust inspired by the stories 
themselves. In the pr esent work, that style is pitiful, constantly lacking in 
any sense of proportion, teeming with sentences in bad taste, filled with 
contradictions and trivial reflections. Now and then, in a few pages, one 
finds a smattering of reflections which are reasona ble and based upon 
principles of justice, but ’tis  as though they were tacked onto the work as 
an afterthought. One feels they do not relate at all to anything which has preceded or to anything that follows.  
Nor should the reader believe for a moment that a single crime for 
every story is sufficient for the author, for such is not the case; he crams 
them in: ’tis  a tissue of horrors. In one tale, a woman is violated by her 
son, she kills him, subsequently she sends her own mother to the gallows 
and marries her father. In another, we observe a father who raises his 
daughter according to the most despicable principles, lives in sin with her, persuades her to poison her mother, etc. And these are examples of 
what the author is so bold as to term “perfecting the  art of writing.”  
You who write novels, ’tis  no longer in the world around you, in the 
realm of reality whose events either trouble or embellish life, nor is it any longer in the more complete and perfect understanding of the human 
heart, that you must loo k for your subjects. Rather must you delve into the history of poisoning, debauchery, and murder, and draw therefrom. 
And you must portray villains as being happy—all for the greater glory 
and encouragement of virtue.  
Rousseau, Voltaire, Marmontel, Fieldin g, Richardson, et al., you have 
not written novels. You have painted customs, you should have painted 
crimes. You make virtue appear attractive by proving to us that virtue 
alone is the way to happiness. You are all wrong. You should show us “virtue overwh elmed by vice”; ’tis thus one instructs and holds the 
reader’s interest. But you were not among the select few whom Nature has created to paint her; you did not become her “lover the moment she gave you birth.” Nor have you “opened her bosom with fear and 
trembling, therein to seek your art.” You were not endowed with the 
“burning zeal to describe absolutely everything,” nor were you blessed with the ability to know how to strike home a dozen times straight and 
true with the dagger’s blade. In your insipid works, we do not observe 
mothers strangling their children or children who poison their mothers; nor do we find sons who rape their own mothers. Adieu, Rousseau, 
Voltaire, Marmontel, Fielding, and Richardson: you will be read no 
more.  
V
ILLETERQUE
 T
he Author of  Les Crimes de l’Amour  
To Villeterque, Hack Writer1  
I have long been of the opinion that insults dictated by jealousy, or by 
any other motive even more abject, which e ventually reach our ears via 
the foul breath of a hack writer, should have no more effect upon a man of letters than the early morning sounds in the farmyard —the barking 
and the cackling —would have upon a sensible, peaceable traveler. 
Consequently filled with naught but contempt for the impertinent diatribe written by Villeterque- the-hack, I would most assuredly not 
bother my head about replying to it were it not for my desire to alert the 
public to the constant danger of being slandered at the hands of the se 
gentlemen.  
From the stupid account Villeterque gave Les Crimes de l’Amour  ’tis 
obvious he has not read the book. If he had, he would never have put 
1 We apply the term “journalist” to an educated man, a man capable of discussing a 
work reasonably, of analyzing and giving an account of it with sufficient c larity to 
render it familiar to the reader. But whosoever has neither the intelligence nor the 
judgment necessary to exercise that honorable calling, whosoever compiles, prints, 
slanders, lies, vilifies, rants and raves—all of which he does to earn a livin g—that man, 
I say, is naught but a  hack; and that man is Villeterque. (See his article of 30  
Vendémiaire,  Year IX.)  words into my mouth that have never even crossed my mind; nor would 
he quote out of context isolated phra ses—which someone no doubt 
dictated to him —in order that, by twisting them to fit his purpose, he 
might give them a meaning they were never intended to have.  
And yet, without having read the book (as I have just shown), 
Villeterque begins by labeling my wo rk DETESTABLE  and by 
CHARITABLY  declaring that this DETESTABLE  work comes from the hand 
of a man suspected of having penned one even more  HORRIBLE .2  
At this point, I challenge Villeterque to do two things he cannot 
refuse me: 1) To publish not isolated, t runcated, and mutilated phrases, 
but complete passages which prove my book to be DETESTABLE , 
although those who have read it are in agreement that it is, on the contrary, a work solidly based upon a refined and heightened sense of morality. 2) I challenge him to prove that I am the author of that even 
more 
HORRIBLE  book.  
’Tis only a vile slanderer who thus casts wild aspersions upon a 
person’s integrity without offering the slightest proof to buttress them. 
The truly honest man offers proof, cites facts, and refuses to deal in 
hearsay. Villeterque, however, denounces without proving; he makes a 
most odious allegation against me but fails to specify what it is. 
Therefore, Villeterque is a slanderer; what is more, Villeterque is not 
ashamed to reveal that he i s a slanderer even before he commences his 
diatribe.  
Be that as it may, I state and affirm that I have never written any 
immoral books,  and that I never shall. I repeat it again here, not for the 
2 Here again, of course, Sade is referring to the allegation that he is the author of  
Justine. —Tr.                                           sake of the hack writer Villeterque —’twould  be seeming to as cribe too 
much weight to his opinion—but for the sake of the public, whose 
judgment I respect as much as I despise Villeterque’s.3  
After that initial act of generosity, the sixpenny hack broaches the 
substance of the matter. Let us follow him, if we are not overcome by a feeling of disgust; for ’tis difficult to follow Villeterque without 
experiencing a feeling of revulsion: his opinions are a cause for disgust, 
and his writings —or rather his plagiarisms —inspire it …. No matter; let 
us be brave.  
3 ’Tis this same contempt that compels me to remain silent with what regards that 
idiotic, slanderous rhap sody by one Despaxe  by name, who also claimed I was the 
author of that infamous book which, out of deference to our moral code, we must ever 
refrain from mentioning. Full aware that this misc hief-maker was naught but a 
swindler spewed forth by the Garonne and, for some ridiculous reason, come to disparage in Paris arts whereof he was completely ignorant, works he had never read, and worthy persons who ought to have joined forces and bludgeoned  him to death; 
perfectly aware that this obscure individual, this ne’er -do-well, had with great pain 
given birth to a few detestable verses, solely with this perfidious object in mind, for whose results the beggar waited as though for a crust of bread, I r esolved to let him 
languish shamefully in the humiliation and opprobrium into which his sorry scribbling had straightway cast him, fearing lest my ideas, were they to linger for even a minute upon so loathsome a creature, might be defiled. But as these gen tlemen have chosen to 
emulate those asses which, when they are hungry, bray in unison, I have been obliged to strike out indiscriminately against them all, in order to still the racket. This, then, is what compels me to lift them for a moment, by their ear s, from the slough wherein 
they lay expiring, so that the public may recognize them by the seal of shame upon their foreheads; after which, having rendered this service to humanity, I boot them 
both back into the foul sewer wherein their baseness and degra dation will keep them 
wallowing forever.                                           In my “Refl ections on the Novel,” Villeterque -the-ignoramus assures 
us that I am guilty of an infinite number of errors, despite all my 
seeming erudition. Here again should the charge not be backed up by 
proof? But in order to recognize errors of erudition,  one must have a 
smattering of erudition oneself, and Villeterque, who is soon going to 
demonstrate that he does not have even a nodding acquaintance with 
scholarly works, is far from possessing the erudition it would require to prove my errors. Therefore he limits himself to declaring that I commit 
them, without having the courage to specify what they are. To be sure, 
this kind of criticism is not difficult, and I am no longer surprised that there are so many critics and so few good works. This is the reason why 
most of the literary journals, Villeterque’s first and foremost, would be 
completely unknown if their publishers did not slip them furtively into 
people’s pockets, like the addresses of those charlatans that are dropped 
in the streets.  
My errors clearly estab lished, clearly proven, as we have seen, by the 
word of the scholar Villeterque, who none the less does not have the courage to cite a single one, the worthy hack then proceeds to an 
examination of my principles, and ’tis  here he is profound: ’tis  here that 
Villeterque rants and raves: the subtlety and sagacity of his reasoning 
drive all before them; his words are as thunder and lightning, and woe 
unto anyone who remains unconvinced once Aliboron- Villeterque has 
spoken!  
Yes, learned and profound Vile stercu s, I have said before and I say 
again that the study of the great masters has proven to me that ’twas  not 
through the constant triumph of virtue that a writer could claim to hold 
the public’s interest in a novel or a tragedy; that this rule, whether it 
applies to Nature herself or to the works of Aristotle or those of any of our poets, is one whereunto all men must conform for the common weal, 
without its being absolutely essential in a dramatic work of whatever 
kind. But what I am expounding here are not m y own principles; I am 
inventing nothing new: read my works and you will see not only that 
what I am saying here is but the result of the impact upon me of a close 
study of the great masters, but also that I have not even adhered to this 
maxim, however exc ellent or wise I deem it to be. For, in the final 
analysis, what are the two principal mainsprings of dramatic art? Have 
all the authors worthy of the name not declared that they are terror  and 
pity? Now, what can provoke terror  if not the portrayal of crime 
triumphant, and what can cause pity  better than the depiction of virtue a 
prey to misfortune? One therefore has either to forego interest or submit 
to these principles. That Villeterque is not widely enough read to appreciate the truth of this statement, so be it, this will be a source of 
surprise to no one. It is useless to be familiar with the rules of any art 
when one’s only ambition is to write soporific bedtime stories, or to copy some insipid tales out of A Thousand and One Nights  with a view towar d 
proudly passing them off as one’s own. But if Villeterque -the-plagiarist 
is unaware of these principles, for the simple reason that he is unaware of 
practically everything, at least he does not dispute them. And when, for 
the account of his newspaper, he  manages to filch some tickets to a play 
and, ensconced in one of the seats reserved for the non- paying public, he 
is treated, in return for his pittance, to the masterpieces of Racine and Voltaire, let him then learn —when, for example, he goes to see 
Maho met—that Palmire and Seide both die virtuous and innocent, 
whilst Mohammed triumphs; let him also be ever mindful that in Britannicus  the young prince and his mistress likewise die innocent and 
virtuous, whilst Nero continues to reign; let him note the sam e thing in Polyeucte and in Phèdre,  and in a great many other dramatic works. And 
when he has returned home, let him open Richardson and note to what 
degree the celebrated Englishman sustains a high degree of interest by 
portraying virtue’s misfortunes. Th ese are the truths whereof I should 
like Villeterque to be convinced, and if indeed he were, then he would be 
less cholericly,  less arrogantly, less stupidly  inclined to levy criticism 
against those who put them into practice, after the example of our grea t 
writers. But the problem is that Villeterque, who is not a great writer, is 
not even acquainted with the works of the great masters; the problem is 
that, the moment the axe is removed from Villeterque -the-irascible, the 
dear man is completely lost. None the less, let us hearken to this 
eccentric when he speaks of the manner wherein I put these principles 
into practice. Ah! ’tis  on this point the pedant  is a pleasure to hear.  
I say that, in order to sustain interest, there are times when vice must 
offend v irtue; I further declare that this is a sure way to hold attention, 
and upon this axiom Villeterque launches an attack upon my morality. Verily, verily,  I say unto you, Villeterque, that you are as stupid  a judge of 
men as you are of works. What I am presc ribing here is perhaps the 
highest compliment it is possible to pay to virtue; and indeed, were 
virtue not so beautiful, would people ever weep so over her misfortunes? 
If I myself did not believe virtue to be man’s most respected idol, would 
I say to playwrights: Whenever you wish to inspire a feeling of pity in your public, have the courage to assail, if only for a moment, what is 
most beautiful in heaven above or on earth below, and you will see what 
bitter tears your sacrilege will provoke. Therefore, I  pay virtue a 
compliment when Villeterque accuses me of rebelling against its 
worship. But Villeterque, who is doubtless not virtuous, has no idea how 
one pays homage to virtue. Only to the votaries of a divinity is granted access to her temple, and Villet erque, who perhaps has no sense of the 
divinity or any form of worship, hasn’t the faintest notion of what we are 
talking about. But when on the following page Villeterque makes the 
allegation that for me to think the way our great masters do, to pay homag e to virtue as they do, constitutes proof positive that I am the 
author of that book wherein virtue suffers the worst humiliations —’tis  at 
this point, the reader will have to admit, that Villeterque’s logic explodes in all its blinding clarity. I prove that without bringing virtue into the 
picture, it is impossible to write any dramatic work worthy of the name; 
I offer this truth, since I believe and affirm that indignation, anger, and tears must be the result of the insults whereof virtue is the object and  the 
misfortunes wherewith it is afflicted. And from this, if one is to believe Villeterque, it follows that I am the author of that execrable book wherein one finds the exact opposite of everything I set forth and 
profess! Yes, quite the exact opposite, for the author of that work appears 
to make vice triumph over virtue only out of spite …or out of libertinage. 
A perfidious scheme, from which he has no doubt not deemed it 
necessary to derive the least dramatic interest, whilst the models I cite 
have always  taken the opposite tack, and whilst I, insofar as my poor 
powers have enabled me to emulate these masters, have depicted vice in 
my works only in those colors most likely to make it forever detested; 
and if upon occasion I have allowed vice some modicum of triumph over virtue, it was never for any other reason than to make virtue appear more 
interesting or more beautiful. My taking the opposite tack from that 
taken by the author of the book in question does not mean, therefore, 
that I accept or sanction th at author’s principles. Since I loathe these 
principles and shun them in my works, I therefore cannot have adopted 
them. And Villeterque- the-irresponsible, who imagines he will prove my guilt by in fact citing the very evidence which exonerates me from it,  is 
in consequence naught but a cowardly slanderer,  whom it behooves us to 
unmask.  
“But, pray tell, what is the purpose of all these scenes of crime 
triumphant?” asks the hack. The purpose, Villeterque, is to have them 
act as a foil for the opposite scenes , and that in itself is quite enough to 
prove their usefulness. Furthermore, where precisely does crime emerge 
triumphant in those stories you attacked so stupidly  and with such 
effrontery?  I trust the reader will kindly allow me a brief analysis, in order  
to prove to him that Villeterque does not know whereof he speaks when he claims that, in these tales, I grant the greatest ascendancy to vice over 
virtue.  
Where is virtue better rewarded than in the tale entitled Juliette et 
Raunai?  
If virtue is chastised  in La Double Épreuve,  does crime, even so, 
triumph therein? Assuredly not, as there is not a single criminal 
character in this entirely sentimental story.  
Virtue, I admit, succumbs in Miss Henriette Stralson,  as it does in 
Richardson’s Clarissa Harlowe. But in this tale, is crime not punished by 
the very hand of virtue?  
In Faxelange,  is crime not even more severely punished, and virtue not 
freed from its fetters?  
In Florville et Courval,  does the hand of fate allow crime to triumph? 
All the characters who involuntarily perpetrate these crimes are but the pawns of that fate wherewith the Greeks endowed their gods. Do we not 
daily witness the same events as the misfortunes of Oedipus and his 
family?  Where is crime more wretched, and more severely punished, th an in 
Rodrigue?  
In Laurence et Antonio,  does crime not succumb, and is virtue not 
crowned by the sweetest hymen imaginable?  
In Ernestine,  is’t not by the hand of the heroine’s virtuous father that 
the villain Oxtiern is punished?  
Is crime not brought to th e gallows in Dorgeville?  
Does the remorse which leads La Comtesse de Sancerre to the grave 
not avenge the virtue which she outraged?  
Finally, in Eugénie de Franval,  does the monster I painted not run 
himself through with his own sword?  
Villeterque …Villeter que-the-hack, where in the name of all that is 
holy does crime emerge victorious in my stories? Ah! the truth of the 
matter is that the only thing I see triumphing here is your own ignorance 
and your cowardly desire to slander.  
Now, I ask my reprehensible censor  upon what grounds he dares to 
describe such a work as “a compilation of revolting atrocities,” when none of his reproaches proves to be well founded? And once having 
proved that much, what remains of the criticism leveled by that inept 
phrase -maker ? Nothing but satire without a trace of wit, of criticism 
without the slightest discernment, and of spleen without provocation—all because Villeterque is a fool, and from fools there never stems aught 
but foolish things. I contradict myself, the pedagogue V illeterque goes 
on to say, whenever I put into the mouth of one of my protagonists thoughts in any wise contrary to those enunciated in my preface. 
Loathsome ignoramus: have you not yet learned that every character in 
any dramatic work must employ a language in keeping with his 
character, and that, when he does, ’tis  the fictional personage who is speaking and not the author? and that, in such an instance, ’tis  indeed 
common that the character, inspired by the role he is playing, says things 
completely cont rary to what the author may say when he himself is 
speaking? Imagine what a man Crébillon would have been were he 
always to have spoken in the accents of Atrée; or what a person Racine, 
if his thoughts had been only those of Nero. Fancy what a monster 
Rich ardson would have been had his principles been only those of 
Lovelace! Ah, Monsieur Villeterque, what a fool you are! This is one 
truth concerning which both I and my characters will always be in 
complete agreement whenever we have the occasion to exchange  views 
regarding your prosaic existence. But what a show of weakness on my 
part! Must I then resort to reason when ’tis  contempt that is called for? 
And, indeed, what more does a lout deserve, one who dares to say to 
him who at every turn has castigated vi ce: “Show me some villains who 
are happy, ’tis  what is required for one to perfect one’s art: the author of 
Les Crimes de l’Amour  will prove it to you!” No, Villeterque, I neither 
claimed nor proved any such thing; and in my defense I appeal from 
your stup idity to the enlightenment of the public. I said quite the 
contrary, Villeterque, and my works are constructed upon the opposite 
bases.  
A splendid invocation finally brings our hack scribbler’s vile diatribe 
to an end:  
Rousseau, Voltaire, Marmontel, Fielding, Richardson, you have not written novels [he exclaims]. You have painted customs,  you 
should have painted crimes!  
—as though crime did not constitute a part of our customs, and as though there were not criminal customs and virtuous customs.  But this is too much for Villeterque, whose mind is incapable of embracing so vast 
a concept.  
Actually, should such reproaches have even been leveled at me in the 
first place, I who have the highest regard for all those authors whom Villeterque cites, and who have nev er ceased to extol their merits in my 
“Reflections on the Novel”? And, furthermore, have these mortals for whom I have never had anything but the highest regard—these same authors to whom Villeterque refers in his article —have they not 
described and painte d crimes in their works? Is Rousseau’s Julie  such a 
virtuous girl? Is the hero of Clarissa Harlowe  a man of such impeccable 
moral standards? Is there all that much virtue in Zadig  and in Candide ? 
And these are but a few I could name.  
Ah! Villeterque, I hav e somewhere written that when one aspires to 
write without having the good fortune to be endowed with any talent for 
it, it would be infinitely preferable to fashion ladies’ dancing pumps or 
boots; at the time I wrote these words, I did not realize they we re meant 
for you. Follow that advice, my good fellow, pray do; you may perhaps 
turn out to be a tolerable good shoemaker, but as sure as I’m alive you 
will never be anything but a wretched writer. But, Villeterque, you may 
find comfort in the thought that Rousseau, Voltaire, Marmontel, 
Fielding, and Richardson will always be read. Your ridiculous jokes on 
this score will not convince anyone that I disparage these great writers, when on the contrary I have never ceased to cite them as examples. But 
one thing  of which you may be quite certain, Villeterque, is that you will 
never be read, first because you have never written anything which could 
possibly ever survive you; but even assuming that someone should one 
day stumble upon one of your literary plagiarism s, he will certainly prefer to read it in the original, in its pristine state rather than sullied by a pen 
as coarse as yours.  
Villeterque, you have ranted and raved, you have lied, you have piled 
stupidity upon slander, ineptitude upon chicanery —all in or der to 
avenge your mirror -authors, in whose camp your boring anthologies so 
rightly place you.4 I have taught you a lesson, and I stand ready to teach 
you another, if ever you should happen to insult me again.  
D.-A.-F. DE SADE 
  
4 The only work we have, thank God! from this scribbler’s pen is his Veilées,  a work 
he describes as philosophic,  though all it really is, is soporific.  A disgusting, monotonous, 
wearisome collection of debris where in the pedant, ever on his high horse, desires 
nothing more than to have us —stupid creature that he is—mistake his drivel for 
elegance, his turgid style for wit, his plagiarisms for imagination. But alas, upon 
reading him, all we discover are platitudes wh en he is himself, and bad taste when he 
plagiarizes others.                                           F
lorville and Courval, or The Works of Fate 
(1788) 
Monsieur de Courval had just turned fifty -five; a vigorous man, in 
excellent health, he could look forward to another twenty years of life. 
Having known nothing but unpleasantness with a first wife, who had 
long ago left him to devote herself to a life of libertinage, and having good reason to believe, on the basis of the most reliable testimony, that 
this creature was now in her grave, he was seriously considering the 
possibility of remarrying, this time a person who, by the kindn ess of her 
character and the excellence of her morals, would help him to forget his 
earlier misfortunes.  
As unlucky with his children as with his wife, Monsieur de Courval, 
who had had only two —a girl who had died while still very young, and a 
boy who, at the age of fifteen had, like his wife, abandoned him, 
unfortunately to follow the same principles of debauchery —Monsieur de 
Courval, I repeat, did not believe that any ties could ever bind him to 
this monster, and planned to disinherit him and bequeath his  
possessions to the children he hoped to have by the new wife he wished 
to marry. He had an income of fifteen thousand francs: formerly 
engaged in business, his fortune was the fruit of his labors, and he had lived well within his means, as decent men will , surrounded by a handful 
of friends who loved and esteemed him, who visited him either in a 
handsome apartment which he occupied on the rue Saint -Marc or, more 
often, on a charming little estate near Nemours, where Monsieur de 
Courval spent two- thirds of the year.  
This worthy man disclosed his plan to his friends, and seeing that 
they approved of it, he bade them make immediate inquiries amongst their acquaintances to discover whether in their circle there were 
someone between the ages of thirty and thirty -five, whether a widow or 
spinster, who might serve his purpose.  
Two days later, one of his former colleagues came to inform him that 
he believed he had found exactly the person Monsieur de Courval was 
seeking.  
“The young lady I am recommending to you,” his friend said to him, 
“has two things against her which I must first reveal, so that I can subsequently console you by giving an account of her good qualities. ’Tis  
quite certain that neither her father nor mother is alive, but we have no 
idea who they wer e or where she lost them. All we do know,” the 
intermediary went on, “is that she is the cousin of Monsieur de Saint -
Prât, a man of considerable reputation who acknowledges her, esteems her, and who will freely sing her praises to you, which is no more tha n 
she deserves. Her parents left her nothing, but she has an income of four 
thousand francs from Monsieur de Saint -Prât, in whose house she was 
reared and wherein she spent her entire childhood. This is her first fault,” said Monsieur de Courval’s friend, “let us move on to the second: 
an affair that occurred when she was sixteen years old, a child who died; 
she has never seen the father again. So much for the debit side; now a 
word about the things in her favor.  “Mademoiselle de Florville is thirty- six yea rs old, though she looks 
but twenty -eight, if that; it would be difficult to conceive of a more 
attractive and interesting face: her features are gentle and delicate, her 
skin has the whiteness of a lily, and her chestnut -brown hair reaches 
down to her ank les. Her mouth is fresh, most pleasantly adorned, the 
very image of a springtime rose. She is rather tall, but she has such a lovely figure, there is so much grace in her movements, that her height, which otherwise might make her appear somewhat hard, is o f no 
consequence. Her arms, her neck, her legs, are all pleasingly molded, and hers is a kind of beauty that will long resist the onset of age.  
“As for her conduct, her extreme regularity may perhaps not please 
you. She is not much given to mundane activit ies and leads a most 
secluded life. She is extremely pious, assiduous in her devotion to the duties of the convent in which she lives, and if she is a source of 
edification to all those around her by her religious qualities, she also is a 
source of delight  to all who behold her, because of her mind and the 
charms of her character …. In a word, she’s an angel on earth, whom 
Heaven has reserved for the happiness of your later years.”  
Monsieur de Courval, delighted at the prospect of such an encounter, 
urged hi s friend to arrange for him to see the person in question without 
further delay.  
“The matter of her birth concerns me not in the least,” he said. “So 
long as her blood is pure, what does it matter to me who transmitted it 
to her? And her affair when she wa s sixteen daunts me just as little; she 
has made up for the lapse by many years of modesty and discretion. I 
shall marry her as though I were marrying a widow. Having set my mind 
on a woman between thirty and thirty -five, ’twould  have been difficult 
indeed  for me to add to that demand the foolish requirement that she be a virgin. Thus, nothing about your proposals displeases me; all that 
remains is for me to urge you to let me see the object herself.”  
Monsieur de Courval’s friend was not long in satisfying his desire. 
Three days later he gave a dinner at his house, with the lady in question as one of the guests. It was difficult not to be captivated at first sight by 
this charming person: her features were those of Minerva herself, 
disguised beneath those of love. Since she was privy to the matter, she 
was even more reserved, and her decorum, her circumspection, and the 
nobility of her bearing, together with so many physical attributes and so 
gentle a nature, and with so judicious and well -developed a mind, s oon 
had poor Courval so enamored that he begged his friend to hasten 
matters to their conclusion.  
They met again two or three times, once at the same house, another 
time at Monsieur de Courval’s, or at Monsieur de Saint -Prât’s, and 
finally, in response to his most earnest entreaties, Mademoiselle de 
Florville declared to Monsieur de Courval that nothing could flatter her more than the honor he was bestowing upon her but that, in all fairness, 
she could in no wise accept before she herself had discovered to him the 
adventures of her life.  
“You have not been told everything,” said this charming girl, “and I 
cannot consent to be yours until you know more about me. Your esteem 
means too much to me to put myself in a position whereby I might lose it, and I assure dly would not deserve it if, taking advantage of your 
illusions, I were to consent to become your wife, without your first judging whether I am worthy to be.”  
Monsieur de Courval assured her that he was aware of everything, 
that ’twas  he rather than she wh o should be evincing the concern she was 
showing, and that if he were fortunate enough to please her, then she should no longer trouble her head about it. Mademoiselle de Florville 
was firm; she insisted that she would not give her consent to anything 
until Monsieur de Courval had been thoroughly instructed with regard 
to her; and so he had to give in to her. The only concession he was able to wrest from her was that Mademoiselle de Florville would come to his 
estate near Nemours, that all preparations woul d be made for the 
marriage he desired, and that, as soon as he had heard her story, she 
would become his wife forthwith.  
“But Monsieur,” said that gracious girl, “if all these preparations come 
to naught, why make them? …What if I convince you that I was not 
born to be yours? …” 
“That, Mademoiselle, is something I defy you ever to convince me of,” 
said the worthy Courval. “Let us proceed, I beg of you, and do not stand in the way of my plans.”  
On this last point he was not to be swayed; all the arrangements w ere 
made, and they left for Courval’s estate. There, however, they were alone, as Mademoiselle de Florville had requested; the things she had to 
say were only for the ears of the man who wished to marry her; hence no 
one was admitted. The day after her arr ival, this beautiful and interesting 
girl, having asked Monsieur de Courval to listen closely, related the 
events of her life in the following terms:  
MADEMOISELLE DE FLORVILLE’S STORY  
Your intentions concerning me, Monsieur, no longer allow that you 
be kep t in ignorance of certain things. You have seen that Monsieur de 
Saint -Prât, to whom you have been told I was related, has himself 
attested to this fact. And yet, on this point, you have been completely misled. My origins are a total mystery to me, and I h ave never had the satisfaction of knowing who my parents were. When I was only a few 
days old, I was found in a green taffeta bassinet on Monsieur de Saint -
Prât’s doorstep; to the canopy of the bassinet was attached an anonymous letter, which simply said:  
Since after ten years of marriage you have no children, and since your 
constant desire is to have one, adopt this infant; her blood is pure; she is the issue of a chaste marriage and not of libertinage; her birth is honorable. If the child is not to your l iking, take her to an orphanage. Make no inquiries, they 
will come to naught. It is impossible to tell you anything more.  
The worthy people on whose doorstep I had been left straightway 
took me in, raised me, and tendered me every possible care. I can say 
that I owe them everything. As there was no indication of my name, it 
pleased Madame de Saint -Prât to call me Florville.  
I had just turned fifteen when I had the misfortune of seeing my 
protectress die. Nothing can express the pain I felt at that loss. I h ad 
become so dear to her that on her deathbed she besought her husband never to abandon me and to settle on me an income of four thousand 
francs. Both requests were punctually granted, and to these kindnesses 
Monsieur de Saint -Prât added that of acknowledg ing me as a cousin of 
his wife and of arranging for me, in this capacity, the bequest with which you are familiar. Yet I could no longer remain under his roof; Monsieur 
de Saint -Prât explained to me why.  
“I am a widower, and still young,” this virtuous man said to me. “To 
live under the same roof might give rise to suspicions that we do not 
deserve. Your happiness and your reputation are dear to me; I do not 
want to compromise either one. We must part company, Florville; but as 
long as I live I shall not abandon you; nor do I even want you to leave 
the fold of my family. I have a sister in Nancy; I am going to commend you to her. Her friendship will be no less steadfast than my own, of that 
I can assure you. And there, with her, still as it were before my ey es, I 
can continue to watch over anything you may require to complete your education or establish your situation in the world.”  
I did not learn this news without breaking down into tears. This latest 
sorrow further intensified the grief I had felt upon the  death of my 
benefactress. None the less convinced that Monsieur de Saint -Prât was 
right, I decided to follow his advice, and I set off for Lorraine, in the 
company of a lady from that region into whose care I had been 
entrusted. She delivered me to Madame  de Verquin, Monsieur de Saint -
Prât’s sister, with whom I was to live.  
Madame de Verquin’s house bespoke an orientation quite different 
from that of Monsieur de Saint -Prât. If in the latter I had seen decency, 
religion, and morality reign supreme, in this other frivolity, the taste of 
pleasure, and independence were ensconced as though ’twas  their 
sanctuary and refuge.  
Before many days had elapsed after my arrival, Madame de Verquin 
informed me that my prudish air displeased her, saying that it was 
incredib le for someone to arrive from Paris with such awkward 
manners …with so ludicrous a strain of modesty, and that if I wished not 
to offend her I would have to adopt another tone. This beginning 
alarmed me; I shall not attempt to make myself out to you any bet ter 
than I am, Monsieur; but all my life I have been deeply displeased by 
anything which departs from the straight and narrow paths of morality 
and religion, I have been the avowed enemy of whatsoever offends 
virtue, and the sins into which I have been led  in spite of myself have 
caused me so much remorse that ’tis  not, I assure you, doing me a service 
to bring me back into contact with the world. I am not made to live in it; and when I am forced into contact with the world, I become shy and 
unsociable. Wha t best befits the state of my soul and the inclinations of 
my mind is the most obscure seclusion.  
These reflections, still imperfectly formulated, not fully ripened at 
such a tender age, did not protect me either from Madame de Verquin’s 
poor counsel or fr om the evil into which her enticements were to plunge 
me. The constant company I saw, the boisterous pleasures with which I 
was surrounded, the example set and the conversation heard —all 
combined to lure me into error. I was told that I was pretty, and I w as 
foolish enough to believe it.  
The Normandy regiment was at that time garrisoned in Nancy. 
Madame de Verquin’s house was the officers’ meeting place. ’Twas  also 
the trysting place for all the young women in town, and there all the amorous intrigues of th e town were begun, broken off, and re -formed.  
It is likely that Monsieur de Saint -Prât was unaware of at least a part 
of his sister’s conduct. How, in the light of his austere morality, could he have agreed to send me there if indeed he had known her well?  This 
consideration made me hesitate, nay kept me from complaining to him. 
Should I be perfectly honest? Perhaps I did not even want to complain 
to him. The impure air I was breathing began to defile my heart and, 
like Telemachus on Calypso’s island, perhaps I might not have listened 
to Mentor’s advice.  
The shameless Madame de Verquin, who for a long time had been 
trying to corrupt me, asked me one day if it was indeed true that I had brought a pure heart with me to Lorraine, and whether I was not 
languishing over some lover left behind in Paris?  “Alas, Madame,” I said to her, “I have never even dreamt of the 
misdeeds you impute to me, and your brother can answer to you 
concerning my conduct ….” 
“Misdeeds?” Madame de Verquin broke in. “If you are guilty of any, 
’tis to be yet so naive at your age. I trust you’ll take steps to correct this.”  
“Oh, Madame, is this the kind of language I should be hearing from 
such a respectable lady?”  
“Respectable? …Ah, not another word! I assure you, my dear, that of 
all the sent iments I would like to inspire, respect is the one I care least 
about. ’Tis love I wish to inspire …. But respect —I am not yet of an age 
to cultivate that sentiment. Follow my example, my dear, and you will be 
happy …. By the way, have you noticed Senneval?”  added that siren, 
referring to a young officer of seventeen who was wont to frequent her 
house.  
“Not particularly, Madame,” I replied. “I can assure you that I look 
upon them all with equal indifference.”  
“That is precisely what you must not do, my dear young friend. From 
now on, I want us to share our conquests …. You must have Senneval. 
He is my handiwork, ’tis I who took the trouble to form him. He loves 
you; you must have him ….” 
“Oh! Madame, I would appreciate your excusing me from such plans. 
Truly, I don’t care for anyone.”  
“You must. The arrangements have already been made with his 
colonel, who, as you have seen, is my present lover.”  
“I beg of you not to involve me in your designs. I am not by nature 
inclined toward the pleasures you cherish.”  
“Oh, t hat will change! Someday you will love them, as I do. ’Tis  all 
too easy not to appreciate things whereof one is still ignorant. But ’tis  inadmissible not to want to know something which was meant to be 
adored. In a word, the plans have already been set: th is evening, 
Mademoiselle, Senneval will declare his passion to you. You had better not keep him languishing too long or I shall be angry with you…extremely angry.”  
At five o’clock the group gathered. As it was very warm, card parties 
were arranged outside in the groves, and everything was so well organized that Monsieur de Senneval and I, being the only ones who 
were not playing, found ourselves obliged to engage in a conversation.  
It would be useless to conceal from you, Monsieur, that no sooner had 
this c harming and witty young man revealed his love to me than I felt 
myself drawn to him as though by some irresistible force. And when 
later I tried to analyze this attraction, I found that it was all very obscure. It seemed to me that this inclination was not  the result merely of some 
ordinary feeling; what distinguished it was concealed by a veil before my eyes. On the other hand, at the very moment my heart would fly out to him, an invincible force seemed to hold it back, and in this tumult, in 
this ebb and flow of incomprehensible ideas, I could not make up my 
mind whether I was doing right to love Senneval, or whether I should 
flee from him forever.  
He was given ample time to declare his love to me…alas, he was 
allowed more than enough! I had time to appear  responsive, in his eyes, 
to his declaration and, taking advantage of my confusion, he demanded 
that I confess my feelings toward him. I was weak enough to tell him 
that he was far from displeasing me and, three days later, guilty enough 
to let him taste the fruits of victory.  
’Tis a truly extraordinary thing, the malicious joy of vice in its 
triumphs over virtue. Nothing could match Madame de Verquin’s transports of pleasure as soon as she learned that I had fallen into the 
trap she had set for me. She lau ghed at me, poked fun at me, and in the 
end assured me that what I had done was the simplest, most reasonable thing in the world. She said I could receive my lover every night in her house, without fear, for she would not even be aware of what I did, 
being  too occupied for her own part to pay any attention to such trifles. 
She added that she would still have as high a regard for my virtue, since 
in all likelihood I would limit myself to this one, whilst she, obliged to 
contend with three, was most assuredly  far from possessing my qualities 
of modesty and reserve. When I took the liberty of telling her that such 
promiscuous conduct was odious, that it showed a lack of sensitivity and 
feeling, that it was demeaning to our sex and reduced it to the level of 
the basest of animals, Madame de Verquin burst out laughing.  
“You Gallic heroine,” she said. “I admire you and do not blame you. I 
am well aware that at your age sensitivity and feeling are the twin gods to whom one sacrifices pleasure. At my age, ’tis  not quite the same. 
Completely disillusioned concerning these phantoms, we accord them 
slightly less sway. We prefer pleasures of a more concrete sort than the 
silly things about which you wax ecstatic. Why, pray tell, should we be 
faithful to men who have never  been faithful to us? Is it not bad enough 
to be the weaker sex, without being the more gullible as well? Any 
woman who lets herself be guided by the principle of sensitivity in such matters is quite foolish …. Believe me, my dear, vary your pleasures 
whils t your age and your charms allow you to, and cast aside your 
chimerical faithfulness, your sad, shy virtue, which is never satisfying in 
itself and never makes any impression on others.”  
These words made me shudder, but I realized that I no longer had the 
right to dispute them. The criminal help of that immoral woman was now necessary to me, and I had to treat her with circumspection. ’Tis  a 
fatal disadvantage of vice, for it places us, as soon as we are in its 
clutches, in bondage to people whom we would otherwise scorn. And so 
I accepted all of Madame de Verquin’s complaisances. Each night Senneval gave me new proof of his love, and thus six months passed in 
such a state of intoxication that I scarcely had time to reflect.  
The baleful consequences soon ope ned my eyes. I became pregnant, 
and I thought I would die of despair upon finding myself in a condition 
which Madame de Verquin merely found amusing.  
“Still in all,” she said, “we must save appearances, and since it would 
not be very seemly for you to have  your child in my house, Senneval’s 
colonel and I have made some arrangements. He is going to give the 
young man a leave. You will depart a few days ahead of him for Metz, and he will follow shortly behind. There, with his help, you’ll give birth 
to this i llicit fruit of your tenderness. Afterward, you will both return 
here, one after the other, the same way you have gone.”  
I had no choice but to obey. As I told you, Monsieur, once one has 
had the misfortune to commit a sin, one places oneself at the mercy of 
all men and all situations; the whole world has a claim upon us, we 
become the slaves of anything that breathes the moment we forget 
ourselves to the point of becoming a thrall to our passions.  
Everything happened just as Madame de Verquin had said. On the 
third day, Senneval and I were once again together, in Metz, at the house of a midwife whose address I had obtained before leaving Nancy, 
and there I gave birth to a boy. Senneval, who had never ceased to 
display the most tender and delicate sentiments , seemed to love me even 
more after I had, to use his own words, doubled his existence. He 
showed me every possible consideration, begged me to leave his son to him, swore to me that he would receive every possible care throughout 
his life, and said that h e would not return to Nancy until his debt with 
regard to me had been fulfilled.  
It was not until he was on the verge of leaving that I dared to mention 
how unhappy the sin he had caused me to commit was bound to make 
me, and to propose that we atone for it by consecrating our union at the 
foot of the altar. Senneval, who had not been expecting this proposal, was much disturbed by it …. 
“Alas,” he said to me, “am I free to do as I like? I am still not of age; 
would I not therefore require my father’s consent ? And what would our 
marriage be without this formality? Besides, I am far from a suitable 
match for you; as Madame de Verquin’s niece —for in Nancy I was 
considered as such —you can aspire to a much better match. Believe me, 
Florville, let us forget our pas t mistakes. You can count on my 
discretion.”  
These words, which I had not at all expected, made me cruelly aware 
of the enormity of my transgression. My pride kept me from responding, 
but as a result my sorrow was all the greater. If anything had been 
concealing the full horror of my conduct from my own eyes, it was, I 
confess, the hope of one day atoning for it by marrying my lover.  
What a credulous girl I was! I did not imagine —although Madame de 
Verquin’s perverse ways should have opened my eyes —I did not believe 
that one could make sport of seducing a poor miserable girl and then 
abandon her. Nor did I realize that honor, this sentiment so highly 
respected amongst men, was so empty and ineffective with regard to us, 
and that our weakness could justify an  insult which men would never 
dare subject one another to except at the risk of their lives. Thus I saw 
myself at once the victim and the dupe of the man for whom I gladly would have laid down my life. This frightful realization came very close 
to sending me to my grave. Senneval did not leave me. The cares he 
proffered me were the same as ever, but never again did he allude to my 
proposal, and I was far too proud to reveal to him a second time the reason for my despair. He disappeared as soon as I was full y recovered.  
My mind made up never to return to Nancy, and knowing full well 
that I was seeing my lover for the last time in my life, I felt all my old wounds reopening when I bade him farewell. None the less, I had the 
strength to endure this final blow… . What a heartless creature! He left, 
tore himself from my breast, which was wet with tears, without shedding 
a single tear himself!  
Such then is the consequence of those vows of love we are foolish 
enough to believe! The more sensitive we are, the more our seducers 
forsake and abandon us …. Perfidious creatures! The greater the means 
we employ to hold them, the greater their tendency to leave us.  
Senneval had taken his child and had placed him somewhere in the 
country where it was impossible for me to find h im…. He wanted to 
deprive me of the joy of loving and raising this tender fruit of our union. 
One would have thought that he wanted me to forget everything which 
might still bind us to each other, and so I did; or, rather, I thought I did.  
I determined to leave Metz immediately and not return to Nancy. Yet 
I did not want to quarrel or break off relations with Madame de 
Verquin. In spite of her failings, it was enough that she was such a close 
relative of my benefactor to make me treat her with consideration 
throughout my life. I wrote her a most courteous letter, using as an 
excuse for not returning to Nancy that my shame over the sin I had 
committed there was too great, and requesting her permission to return 
to her brother’s house in Paris. She answered me  straightway that I was mistress of my own destiny and free to do as I pleased, and said that I 
could always count on her friendship. She added that Senneval had not 
yet come back to Nancy, that no one knew whither he had gone, and 
that I was a foolish gir l to worry my head over all these trifles.  
After I had received this letter, I returned to Paris and hastened to 
cast myself at Monsieur de Saint -Prât’s knees. My silence and my tears 
soon revealed my wretchedness to him; but I was careful to blame no one but myself and never to mention the role his sister had played in my 
seduction. Monsieur de Saint -Prât, like all souls in whom good 
predominates, in no wise suspected his relative’s dissolute ways; he 
judged her the most worthy of women. I did nothing to d issuade him or 
destroy his illusions; Madame de Verquin was aware of this act of loyalty, because of which her friendship for me did not wither.  
Monsieur de Saint -Prât felt sorry for me …made me truly feel the 
wrong I had done, and eventually forgave me.  
“Ah, my child,” he said to me with that gentle gravity of a worthy 
soul, so different from the odious frenzy of crime, “oh, my beloved 
daughter, now you see the price one must pay for straying from the path 
of virtue. ’Tis  so necessary to follow that path, v irtue is so intimately 
bound up with our existence that, the moment we abandon it, nothing 
but misfortune awaits us. Contrast the tranquillity of your state of 
innocence when you departed this house with the frightful anxiety wherewith you are afflicted up on your return. Do the meager pleasures 
you may have experienced in your fall from virtue compensate for the torments which now assail your heart? Happiness, therefore, is to be 
found solely in the exercise of virtue, my child, and all the sophistries of 
its detractors will never bring a single one of its enjoyments or rewards. 
Ah! Florville, those who deny or combat these sweet enjoyments do so out of jealousy and nothing more, of that you can be certain, or from the 
barbarous pleasure of making others as guilty and as wretched as they. 
They blind themselves, and seek to blind everyone else; they have lost 
their way, and seek to lead everyone else astray as well. But were you able to read deep into their hearts, you would discover naught but sorrow and 
remo rse. All these apostles of crime are but miserable, desperate 
creatures. There’s not a single one of them who, were he sincere, would 
not avow, assuming he were capable of telling the truth, that his foul 
words and dangerous writings were in fact motivated  solely by his 
passions. And indeed, what man can seriously maintain that the 
foundations of morality can be undermined without risk? Who would 
dare to claim that to do good, and to desire good, must not perforce be 
the veritable goal of man in life? And h ow can the man who does naught 
but evil expect to be happy in a society whose most vital interest is to see 
good multiply and flourish? But will this apologist for crime not tremble 
constantly himself when he has uprooted from every heart the very thing to which of necessity he owes his preservation? What will prevent his 
servants from bringing about his ruin if they have ceased to be virtuous? 
What will keep his wife from dishonoring him if he has convinced her 
that virtue is worthless? Who will restrain t he hands of his children if he 
has dared to destroy the seeds of good implanted in their hearts? How 
will his freedom, and his possessions, be respected if he has said to the high and mighty: Act with impunity, virtue is naught but a fantasy?  
Therefore, no  matter what this poor wretch’s condition, be he rich or 
poor, father or husband, master or slave, on all sides dangers will spring 
up for him, from all directions daggers will be poised at his heart. Let 
there be no mistake: if he has dared destroy in man  the only duties which offset man’s perversity, then sooner or later the unfortunate 
creature will perish, a victim of his own frightful systems.1  
“Let us leave religion aside for the moment, if you like, and consider 
only man. Who would ever be foolish e nough to believe that, were a 
person to break every law society has formulated, this society which he 
outrages will allow him to go unpunished? Is it not in the interest of 
man, and of the laws he makes for his safety, always to try and destroy whatsoever obstructs it or is harmful to it? Influence of some kind, or 
wealth, may provide the evildoer with a fleeting glimmer of prosperity. 
But how brief will be its reign ! Recognized for what he is, unmasked, 
and soon turned into a hated object of public scorn, will he then find any 
apologists for his conduct? will any partisans appear to comfort or 
console him? No one will admit to knowing him; as he no longer has anything to offer them, all will cast him aside as they would a burden. 
Misfortune will beset him on every side; he will languish in shame and 
adversity, and, no longer having even his own heart as a refuge, he soon 
will die of despair. What, then, is this absurd reasoning on the part of 
our adversaries? What is this impotent effort to attenuate virtue,  to dare 
say that whatsoever is not universal is therefore chimerical, and that, 
virtues always being local, none of them can be said to have any absolute 
validity? What! there is no virtue because each people has had to forge 
its own? because different cl imes and temperatures have necessitated 
1 “Ah, my friend, never try to corrupt the person you love, the situation may get out of 
hand,”  a sensitive woman once said to the friend who was bent upon seducing her. 
Adorable woman, allow me t o quote thine own words, they describe so aptly the soul 
of the woman who, a short while later, saved this same man’s life, that I should like to 
engrave these touching words in the temple of memory, wherein thy virtues assure 
thee a place.                                           different kinds of restraints, because, in one word, virtue has multiplied 
in a thousand guises —because of all this there is no virtue on the face of 
the earth? One might as well doubt of the existence of a river bec ause it 
forks off into a thousand different tributaries and branches. Well, what better proof both of the existence and necessity of virtue is there than 
man’s need to adapt it to his various moral codes and to use it as the 
basis for them all? Show me a s ingle people that lives without virtue, a 
single one for whom benevolence and human kindness are not the 
fundamental bonds —I shall go even further: show me a band of villains 
which is not bound together by some principles of virtue, and I shall 
cease defen ding its cause. But if, on the contrary, virtue is demonstrated 
to be useful everywhere, if there is no nation, no state, no society, no individual that can do without it, if, in one word, man cannot live happily or securely without it, would I then be wrong, my child, to 
exhort you never to stray from it?  
“You see, Florville,” my benefactor went on, enfolding me in his arms, 
“you see where your initial deviation from virtue has brought you. And if error should beckon to you again, if seduction or your own weakness 
should lay new snares for you, dwell then upon the unhappiness this first 
lapse has caused you, think of the man who loves you as he would his 
own daughter …whose heart is broken by your lapses from righteousness, 
and in these reflections you will find all the strength required for a 
devotion to virtue, which I would inculcate in your heart forever.”  
Monsieur de Saint -Prât, in keeping with these same principles, did 
not offer me the hospitality of his own house. Rather, he suggested I go 
and live with one of his relatives, a woman as renowned for the great 
piety of her ways as Madame de Verquin was for her faults. I was 
delighted by this arrangement. Madame de Lérince accepted me gladly and graciously, and within a week after my return to Paris, I wa s 
installed in her house.  
Ah, Monsieur, what a difference between this woman and the one I 
had lately left! If vice and depravity had established their reign in 
Madame de Verquin’s, it was as though Madame de Lérince’s heart was 
the sanctuary of every virt ue. As much as I had been frightened by the 
former’s depravity, so I was equally consoled by the edifying principles 
which governed the latter. In hearkening to Madame de Verquin, I had 
found only bitterness and remorse; in abandoning myself to Madame de 
Lérince, I found naught but kindness and comfort.  
Ah, Monsieur, allow me to describe for you this adorable woman, 
whom I shall cherish always. ’Tis  a tribute my heart owes to her virtues, 
and I am powerless to resist it.  
Madame de Lérince, who was about for ty years of age, was still 
possessed of a freshness of youth; an air of candor and modesty embellished her features even more than did the divine proportions wherewith Nature had endowed them. A trifle too much nobleness and 
majesty rendered her, in the ey es of some, awesome at first glance, but 
what they might have mistaken for pride softened the moment she 
opened her mouth to speak. Hers was a soul so pure and beautiful, she was so gracious and of a candor so entire that one gradually felt an 
increasing t enderness for her, in spite of oneself and in addition to the 
veneration she inspired upon first meeting her. There was nothing 
strained or superstitious about Madame de Lérince’s religion. The 
principles of her faith were dictated by an extreme sensibilit y. The 
notion of the existence of God, the worship due this Supreme Being: 
such were this loving soul’s most lively pleasures. She confessed openly 
that she would be the most miserable creature alive if any perfidious enlightenment should ever force her mi nd to destroy in her the respect 
and love she reserved for her worship. Even more strongly attached —if 
such were possible —to the sublime morality of that religion than to its 
ceremonies and practices, she made this excellent morality the guide for 
her every act. Never had slander sullied her lips; she did not indulge in 
even the slightest jest which might afflict or offend another human 
being. Brimful of tenderness and sensibility for her fellow man, finding them interesting even unto their failings, Madame  de Lérince’s sole 
concern was either carefully to conceal their faults or gently to reprove them. Were they unhappy, she found no greater pleasure than in succoring them; nor did she wait for the poor to come and implore her 
help: she sought them out …she sensed them, and her face could be seen 
to light up with joy whenever she had brought comfort to a widow or 
provided for an orphan, whenever she had arranged materially to help a 
destitute family, or, with her own hands, had broken the chains of 
adversity.  There was nothing harsh, nothing austere in all this: if the 
pleasures proposed were chaste, she partook of them with great delight, 
indeed she invented some of her own, for fear that people might find her 
company boring. Wise …enlightened with the moralis t…profound with 
the theologian, she inspired the novelist and smiled upon the poet, she 
astonished the lawmaker and politician, and directed the games of the 
child. Her mind was brilliant in a number of ways, but the facet that shone brightest in her was t he special care she took, the charming effort 
she made, to bring out the intelligence in others, or to show her appreciation of that quality in them. By inclination living withdrawn 
from society, cultivating her friends out of choice rather than necessity,  
Madame de Lérince was, in one word, a model for either sex, endowing 
everything around her with this tranquil happiness …this celestial delight promised to the honest, decent man by the Holy God of Whom she was 
the living image.  
I shall not weary you, Mons ieur, with the monotonous details of my 
life during the seventeen years I had the good fortune to live with this adorable creature. Discussions concerning morality and piety, as many 
charitable acts as ’twas  possible for us to perform: such were the duties  
that occupied our days.  
“Men are frightened away from religion, my dear Florville,” Madame 
de Lérince used to say to me, “solely because clumsy, unskillful guides 
have made them aware of naught save religion’s restrictions, without offering them its sweet  rewards. Can there exist a man so absurd that, 
when first his eyes open and view the universe, he still refuses to admit that so many wonders can only be the handiwork of an omnipotent God? Once this prime truth has been admitted—and what more is 
required  for his heart to be convinced of it —what kind of cruel and 
barbarous creature would he have to be still to refuse to pay homage to 
the benevolent God by Whom he was created?  
“The diversity of religions is also cited as an embarrassment: one 
thinks to prov e them false by their very multiplicity. What sophistry! Is 
not the existence of this Supreme God proved by this very unanimity of 
all peoples to recognize and serve Him in some guise, is this tacit avowal 
which is engraved in the hearts of all men not a p roof even more 
irrevocable—if indeed such be possible —than the sublimities of Nature? 
What! man cannot live without a God, he cannot question himself without finding proofs within himself, he cannot open his eyes without 
discovering traces of this God ever ywhere, and still he dares to doubt! 
No, Florville, there are no sincere atheists; pride, obstinacy, passion: 
these are the destructive weapons of this God Who ceaselessly revivifies himself in the heart and mind of man. And when every beat of this 
heart, every luminous trait of this mind and reason offers me this 
indubitable Being, shall I refuse to pay Him my homage? Shall I not humble myself before His grace, that I might endure the miseries of life, and someday partake of His glory? Should I not aspire to the favor of 
spending eternity in His bosom, or should I rather run the risk of 
spending this eternity in a frightful abyss of torture, for having refused to accept the indubitable proofs this mighty Being has vouchsafed me with 
what regards the certitu de of His existence! My child, does this awful 
choice allow for even a moment’s reflection? O you who stubbornly 
refuse to recognize the fiery letters this God has traced even in the very 
depths of your hearts, at least be just for a moment and, if only out of 
pity for yourselves, yield to Pascal’s invincible argument: ‘If indeed there is no God, what does it matter whether you believe in Him, what harm 
is there in this allegiance? And if there is a God, what dangers do you 
not run by refusing Him your fait h?’ 
“You say, unbelievers, that you are at a loss to know what homage to 
pay to this God, the multitude of religions beclouds your judgment. Very 
well then, examine them all, I have no objection whatsoever, and 
afterward come and say in good faith in which  of them you find more 
grandeur and more majesty. Deny, if you can, O Christians, that the 
religion into which you were fortunate enough to be born, appears to be the one whose characteristics are holiest and most sublime. Seek 
elsewhere such great mysteri es, dogmas as pure, a morality as 
comforting. Find in some other religion the ineffable sacrifice of a God 
for His creatures; find in another promises more beautiful, a future more 
pleasing, a God greater and more sublime! No, you cannot, ephemeral 
philosopher; you cannot, pleasure’s thrall, you whose faith changes with the physical state of your nerves; blasphemous at the height of your 
passion, a believer as soon as your fires have cooled, you cannot, I say. 
Sentiment constantly acknowledges this God Whom  your mind resists, 
He always exists beside you, even in the midst of your errors. Break the 
chains wherewith you are bound to crime, and never will this Holy, 
Almighty God desert the temple He has erected in your heart. ’Tis  in 
the farthest depths of your  heart, my dear Florville, even more than in 
your reason, that the necessity must be discovered for this God Whom 
everything reveals and proves to us; ’tis  in this same heart we must also 
discover the necessity for the worship we devote to Him, and ’tis  this 
heart which will soon persuade you, my dear friend, that the noblest and 
purest of all religions is the one into which we have been born. Let us 
therefore practice this sweet religion with joy and exactitude, let it fill our most beautiful moments here below and, cherishing it the while, as 
step by step we move toward the term of our days, let it be by the path of 
love and delight that we go to offer up unto the bosom of the eternal Father this soul which emanated from Him, was formed solely to know 
Him,  and which we have enjoyed and delighted in only insofar as we 
have believed in and worshiped Him.”  
’Twas  in this wise Madame de Lérince used to speak to me, and from 
her counsel my mind drew strength, and my soul was purified beneath 
her saintly wing. But , as I have said before, I shall spare you the minor 
details of my daily life in this house and rather concentrate upon what is 
essential. ’Tis my sins I must reveal to you, generous and sensitive man, 
and as for those times when Heaven has vouchsafed to l et me dwell in 
peace on the path of virtue, I shall simply offer up a prayer of thanks and pass them over in silence.  I had not ceased writing to Madame de Verquin; twice a month I 
likewise received letters from her. And although I doubtless should not 
have continued this correspondence, and although the fact that my 
reformed ways and improved principles incited me to break it off, still 
my debt to Monsieur de Saint -Prât, the hope that I might someday 
receive word of my son, and above all —let me confess it —a secret 
feeling which yet drew me ineluctably toward the site of so many past pleasures —all these things led me to keep up a correspondence which 
Madame de Verquin, on her end, was good enough to maintain on a regular basis.  
I tried to convert her, I laud ed the life I was presently leading and 
wrote her of its sweet solace, which she dismissed as a figment of my imagination; she constantly laughed at or combated my resolutions and, ever firm in her own, assured me that nothing in the world would ever 
be able to weaken them. She wrote me of the new girls whom she had, 
for her own amusement, won over to her cause, and claimed they were far more docile than I had been. This toppling of so many virtues was, 
the perverse woman claimed, but a small triumph, so many little victories 
she always enjoyed winning, and the pleasure of luring these young 
hearts into evil consoled her for being unable to realize all that her 
imagination incited her to undertake.  
I was wont to ask Madame de Lérince to lend me her eloquent pen in 
order to unsettle my opponent, and she was happy to oblige. Madame de Verquin answered us, and her sophisms, oftentimes extremely 
convincing, obliged us to resort to even more compelling arguments of a 
sensitive soul, wherein, so Madame de Lérince r ightly maintained, was 
everything necessary to destroy vice and confound incredulity.  From time to time I asked Madame de Verquin for news of the man I 
still loved, but either she could not or would not deign to give me any.  
The time has come, Monsieur; I must tell you of the second 
catastrophe of my life, a tale so cruel and bitter it breaks my heart each 
time I call it to mind. Hearing it, you will learn of the terrible crime of 
which I am guilty and will no doubt abandon the flattering plans you 
have reg arding me.  
Madame de Lérince’s house, however orderly I may have portrayed it 
to you, was none the less accessible to a handful of friends: Madame de Dulfort, a woman well along in years who was formerly attached to the household of the Princesse de Piémon t, and who came very often to see 
us, one day asked Madame de Lérince for permission to introduce to her a young man who came to her most highly recommended, and whom she would be pleased to bring into a house wherein the examples of 
virtue to which he would constantly be exposed could only contribute to 
mold his heart. My benefactress apologized, saying that she never received young men, but later, hard pressed by her friend’s urgent 
entreaties, she consented to meet the Chevalier de Saint -Ange.  
He made hi s appearance. Whether out of presentiment …or whatever 
you care to name it, Monsieur, when first I laid eyes upon this young man, I was seized with a trembling that shook me from head to foot, the 
cause of which ’twas  impossible to conceal …. I almost fainte d…. As I 
did not search for the reason for this strange reaction, I imputed it to 
some strange disposition, and Monsieur de Saint -Ange ceased to 
preoccupy me. But if this young man had, at first sight, been such a 
source of agitation to me, he too had been  the victim of a similar 
disturbance; he later admitted this to me himself. Saint -Ange was filled 
with so great an admiration for the house into which he had been granted access that he did not dare forget himself so far as to reveal what 
flame was inwardl y consuming him. Thus three months went by before 
he found the courage to say anything to me; but I noted such a vivid expression in his eyes that it soon became impossible for me not to understand what they were saying. My mind firmly made up not to fall 
prey again to the kind of error which had been the cause of all my 
suffering, and strengthened now by better principles, I was upon twenty different occasions on the verge of informing Madame de Lérince of the 
feelings I thought I discerned in the young ma n. Subsequently restrained 
by the fears I thought I might arouse in her, I chose to remain silent. A 
baleful resolution, it would appear, since it resulted in the frightful 
calamity whereof I shall shortly apprise you.  
We were wont to spend six months each  year on a lovely country 
estate Madame de Lérince owned ten leagues from Paris. Monsieur de 
Saint -Prât often used to come and visit us there. Unfortunately for me, 
this particular year he was down with a siege of gout, which prevented 
him from joining us.  I say unfortunately for me, Monsieur, because, 
quite naturally having a greater confidence in him than in his relative, I 
would have confessed to him certain things I could never bring myself to 
discover to others, the avowal of which would no doubt have warded off 
the fatal accident which befell me.  
Saint -Ange requested permission to join us on our journey, and as 
Madame de Dulfort also interceded in his behalf, his request was granted.  
All of us in our little group were concerned to know who this young 
man really was. Nothing very precise or substantial seemed to be known 
of his background or origins; Madame de Dulfort passed him off as the 
son of a provincial gentleman to whom she was related, whilst he, now and again forgetting what Madame de Dulfort had said, referred to 
himself as a native of Piedmont, a claim further reinforced by the 
manner in which he spoke Italian. He was of an age to embark upon a 
career, but thus far had not done so, nor did he seem so inclined. He had, moreover, a very pretty fa ce, full worthy of being portrayed by an 
artist’s brush, had excellent manners, a conversation which was exceeding decent, and also appeared to be very well educated; but behind all this there lurked a prodigious vitality, a kind of impetuosity of 
characte r which at times frightened us.  
No sooner had we arrived at Madame de Lérince’s country estate than 
Monsieur de Saint -Ange, whose feelings had only grown more intense 
because of his efforts to curb them, found it impossible to conceal them 
any longer from me. I trembled …and yet managed to maintain sufficient 
composure to show him naught but pity.  
“In truth, Monsieur,” I said to him, “you must have a false opinion of 
your own worth, or else time must weigh heavy indeed upon your hands if you have enough to d evote to someone twice your age. But even 
assuming I were foolish enough to hear you out, what foolish plans 
might you dare entertain regarding me?”  
“Plans to bind myself to you by the holiest of ties, Mademoiselle. 
How little esteem you must have for me, if you could even suspect I had 
any others!”  
“To be quite candid with you, Monsieur, I do not intend to offer the 
public the odd spectacle of a woman thirty -four marrying a child of 
seventeen.”  
“Ah! cruel woman, could you even conceive of such insignificant 
differences if in your heart there was a flame even one -thousandth as 
strong as the one that consumes mine?”  “’Tis certain indeed, Monsieur, that, for my part, I am quite calm …. I 
have been so for many a year, and I trust I shall so remain for as long as  
God sees fit to prolong my days here on earth.”  
“You deprive me even of the hope that I might one day move your 
heart to pity.”  
“I shall go even further: I dare forbid you to speak to me any further of 
your mad projects.”  
“Ah! Florville, beautiful Florvil le, so you wish to make my life 
miserable?”  
“I wish it to be peaceful and happy.”  
“It can be so only with you.”  
“Yes…as long as you fail to rid yourself of the foolish sentiments you 
should never have conceived in the first place. Try to vanquish them, try  
to control yourself, and your tranquillity and composure will return.”  
“I cannot.”  
“You don’t want to; to succeed in the effort, we must separate. Let 
two years go by without seeing me, this agitation will disappear, you will 
forget me, and you will be happy.”  
“Ah, never, never …For me there will never be any happiness save at 
your feet ….” 
And as the other guests rejoined us at this moment, our first 
conversation concluded on this note.  
Three days later, Saint -Ange, having again contrived to see me alone, 
attempted to renew the conversation in the same vein as that of the 
earlier evening. This time, I was so stern in admonishing him to remain 
silent that tears rushed to his eyes. He turned from me abruptly, 
declaring that I was driving him to despair and that, if I continued to treat him in this manner, he would soon put an end to his life …. Then, 
retracing his steps like a man possessed:  
“Mademoiselle,” he said to me, “you do not know the soul you are 
outraging …. No, truly you do not. You must know that I am  capable of 
resorting to the most extreme measures …measures which you perhaps 
cannot even imagine …. Yes, I shall resort to them a thousand times over 
rather than forgo the happiness of being yours.”  
And he withdrew in a state of dreadful agitation.  
I had n ever been more tempted than I was at that moment to confide 
in Madame de Lérince, but, I repeat, I was restrained by the fear of 
compromising this young man, and I said nothing.  
Saint -Ange spent the following week fleeing my presence; he scarcely 
addressed a word to me, and avoided me at table …in the salon…during 
our walks, probably in order to see whether this change in his conduct 
would make any impression upon me. Had I shared his feelings, this 
strategem would surely have worked, but this was so far from the case that I scarcely seemed to be aware of his tactics.  
At last he accosted me in a remote corner of the garden …. 
“Mademoiselle,” he said, his words ill concealing the violence of the 
feelings behind them, “I have finally managed to regain my self -
composure …your counsels have had upon me the effect you desired and 
expected …. As you can see, I am again in complete control of myself… . 
My only purpose in getting you alone is to bid you my final adieu…. 
Yes, I’m going to leave you forever, Mademoiselle …. I’m going to flee 
from you…never again will you set eyes upon the man you loathe …oh! 
no, no, you will never see him again!”  “I am pleased to hear of your plan, Monsieur, and would like to 
believe that you have at last come to your senses again. But,” I added, 
smiling, “your conversion appears to me as yet far from accomplished.”  
“Well, how would you have me be then, Mademoiselle, in order for 
me to convince you of my indifference?”  
“Quite different from the way I see you now.”  
“But at least after I have lef t…when my presence is no longer a 
painful burden to you, then will you perhaps believe in my return to that reason toward which all your efforts have been urging me?”  
“It is true that ’tis  only your departure which will persuade me of your 
return to reason , and I shall never cease counseling you to adopt that 
course.”  
“Am I then such a frightful object for you?”  
“You, Sir, are a most amiable man, who ought to be devoting his time 
to conquests of another sort, and to leave in peace a woman for whom it 
is imp ossible to hear your pleas.”  
“And yet you will hear me,” he then said, in an absolute rage, “yes, 
cruel woman, no matter what you may say, you shall hear the sentiments 
of my inflamed heart, and you may rest assured that there is nothing in 
the world I shall not do, either to deserve you or to obtain you …. Nor 
should you believe in my departure,” he went on in great heat, “or my pretended departure. I dreamt that up merely to test you …. Me, leave 
you! Do you for one moment believe I could tear myself away from this 
place where you dwell? …Hate me, falsehearted creature, hate me, since 
such is my unhappy fate, but never hope to vanquish the love for you 
which burns within me ….” 
And as he spoke these last words, Saint -Ange was in such a state that, 
by some turn  of fate I have never been able to understand, he succeeded in touching my heart, and I was obliged to turn away my head to hide 
my tears. I left him there in the thicket where he had managed to corner 
me. He made no effort to follow me; I heard him throw himself to the 
ground and give way to a fit of sobbing both frightful and completely 
uncontrolled …. And Monsieur, I must admit that, although I was quite 
certain that I did not entertain any feelings of love for this young man, I could not contain myself, and I in turn burst out sobbing, whether out of 
commiseration for him or from the memory of my own earlier 
experiences.  
“Alas,” I said to myself, yielding to my sorrow, “those were the same 
words Senneval used. ’Twas  in these very terms that he expressed h is 
burning love for me …also in a garden …in a garden just like this 
one…did he not tell me he would love me forever …and did he not 
deceive me cruelly? Merciful Heaven! he was even the same age…. Ah! Senneval …Senneval …is’t you who are trying once again to de stroy my 
peace of mind? Have you reappeared in this seductive guise only to drag 
me down again into the abyss?… Away, you coward! …away…I now 
loathe even your memory!”  
I wiped away my tears, and went to lock myself in my room till dinner 
time. Then I went do wnstairs …but Saint -Ange did not appear, but sent 
word that he was ill. The following day he was clever enough to reveal to me a face which seemed completely untroubled. I was taken in by appearances; I really believed that he had mustered sufficient streng th to 
overcome his passion. I was mistaken; the treacherous scoundrel! …Alas, 
what am I saying, Monsieur? I owe him no more invectives …. All I owe 
him are my tears, and my remorse.  
Saint -Ange appeared so calm because he had laid his plans. Two days 
passed, and toward the evening of the third he publicly announced his departure. With Madame de Dulfort, his benefactress, he made 
arrangements concerning their common affairs in Paris.  
We all went to bed …. Forgive me, Monsieur, for the commotion this 
frightful ta le arouses within me even before I have finished relating it: I 
can never call it to mind without trembling with horror.  
As it was exceeding warm, I had gone to bed almost naked. My maid 
had just left the room, and I had snuffed out the candle …. 
Unfortunat ely, a sewing basket had remained open on my bed, for I had 
just cut some material I was going to need the following day. Scarcely had my eyes begun to close than I heard a noise …. I quickly sat up …I 
felt myself seized by a hand….  
“This time you’ll not esc ape me, Florville,” said Saint -Ange, for ’twas  
he; “forgive the immoderation of my passion, but make no effort to elude it: I must make you mine!”  
“Vile seducer!” I cried out, “leave this room immediately, or suffer the 
effects of my wrath ….” 
“The only thi ng which will make me suffer is not to have you, cruel 
girl,” the ardent young man went on, throwing himself upon me so 
skillfully and with such fury that before I knew what he was about the 
damage was done …. 
Incensed by his excessive audacity, and determi ned to resort to any 
measures rather than submit to it any longer, I threw him off me and 
seized a pair of scissors I had at the foot of the bed. My anger 
notwithstanding, I maintained control of myself and sought to wound 
him in the arm, much more in orde r to frighten him by this display of 
resolution on my part than to punish him as he deserved to be; feeling 
my movement, his own became redoubled in intensity.  “Out, traitor!” I cried, thinking to strike him in the arm, “get out this 
minute, and blush at t he crime you have committed !…” 
Oh! Monsieur, a fatal hand had guided my blows …. The poor young 
man uttered a piercing cry and fell to the floor …. I straightway lighted 
my candle and bent over him …. Merciful Heaven! I had struck him in 
the heart! He was dyi ng! I threw myself on the bloody body …I pressed 
him to my troubled breast …my lips, pressed against his, tried to breathe 
life back into the expiring soul. I washed his wound with my tears …. 
“O you! whose only crime was to love me overmuch,” I said, despair  
having driven me to a state of frenzy, “did you deserve such punishment? 
Should you have lost your life at the hand of her for whom you would 
have sacrificed it gladly? Oh, poor, poor young man…the image of him 
whom I adored, if to love you would undo wha t I have done and restore 
you to life, know then, at this cruel moment, when unhappily you can no 
longer hear me, know, if there is still a breath of life left in your soul, 
that I would gladly sacrifice my own life if ’twould  suffice to bring back 
yours …. Know that I was never indifferent to you…that I never saw you 
without a feeling of intense emotion, and that my feelings for you were 
perhaps far superior to those of the tender love which burned in your 
heart.”  
With these words, I collapsed upon the body of this unfortunate 
young man, and fell unconscious. My maid, having heard the 
commotion, entered the room, and revived me, then joined me in my 
efforts to bring Saint -Ange back to life. But it was all to no avail, alas! 
We left this fatal room, carefully  locked the door behind us, we took the 
key with us and straightway fled to Paris, to Monsieur de Saint -Prât’s …. 
I had him awakened, handed him the key of this baleful room, and 
recounted to him my horrible adventure. He offered me sympathy, comforted me, and, despite his illness, immediately set out for Madame 
de Lérince’s house. As it was but a short distance from Paris to her 
country estate, all this transpired before the night was out. My protector 
reached his relative’s estate just as everyone was gett ing up, and before 
anyone knew what had happened during the night. Never have any 
friends, or any relatives, conducted themselves more nobly than in this 
circumstance: far from imitating those stupid or ferocious persons who, in such crucial moments, find pleasure only in making known whatever 
can damage or render unhappy those around them as well as themselves, 
in this instance the servants scarcely knew what had happened.  
“Well, now, Monsieur,” said Mademoiselle de Florville, breaking off 
her tale at this  point because of the tears which were choking her, “will 
you now marry a girl capable of such a murder? Will you suffer in your arms a creature who deserves the full punishment of the law, a sorry 
creature who is constantly tormented by her crime and who,  since the 
cruel moment when she committed it, has not spent a single peaceful 
night? No, Monsieur, not a single night has gone by that my poor victim 
has not appeared to me covered with the blood I caused to flow from his 
heart.”  
“Don’t be so upset, Madem oiselle, I beg of you,” quoth Monsieur de 
Courval, mingling his tears with those of that charming girl. “Given the 
sensitive soul wherewith Nature has endowed you, I understand your remorse. But there is not even the shadow of a crime in this fatal 
adventu re. ’Tis without question a most terrible misfortune, but nothing 
more. There is nothing premeditated, nothing atrocious about it; simply 
the desire to ward off a most odious assault …in a word, a murder 
committed quite by chance, in self- defense …. Dismiss it from your 
mind, Mademoiselle, this I beg of you, nay, I demand it. The most rigorous tribunal would have done naught but wipe away your tears. Oh! 
how mistaken you were if you feared for a moment that an event such as 
this would deprive you of the right s to my heart which your qualities 
have assured you. No, fair Florville, no indeed: far from dishonoring you, 
this whole affair tends but to accentuate your virtues all the more 
brilliantly, it renders you ever more worthy of finding a comforting hand 
to help you forget your sorrows.”  
“The kind words you have just offered me,” Mademoiselle de Florville 
went on, “are the same as those Monsieur de Saint -Prât has expressed. 
But the great goodness both of you have shown me can in no wise stifle the pangs of my own conscience. No matter, Monsieur; let us proceed 
with our story; you must be anxious to learn how all this turns out.”  
Madame de Dulfort was no doubt deeply grieved: not only was this 
young man a most attractive person, he had come to her too highly 
recommended for her not to deplore his loss. None the less, she 
understood the wisdom of silence, she saw that scandal, though it would 
mean my ruin, would not bring her protégé back to life; and she said not 
a word.  
Despite the severity of her principles and  the extreme probity of her 
morals, Madame de Lérince behaved even more admirably, if such were possible, for prudence and humanity are the distinctive characteristics of 
true piety. First she informed the household that during the night I had been foolish  enough to wish to ride up to Paris, in order to take 
advantage of the pleasant weather; she added that she had been privy to 
this innocent caprice, that she had in fact approved of my act, as she 
herself had planned to drive to Paris to dine that same eve ning. Using 
this as a pretense, she sent all her servants up to Paris. Once she was alone with Monsieur de Saint -Prât and her friend Madame de Dulfort, she sent for the priest. Madame de Lérince’s spiritual guide must have 
been as wise and enlightened as s he: without further ado, he gave 
Madame de Dulfort an official certificate and, with the help of two of his servants, secretly and humanely interred the poor victim of my rage.  
Once this had been taken care of, everyone reappeared and was sworn 
to secrecy.  Monsieur de Saint -Prât came to comfort me, revealing to me 
all that had just been done to bury my misdeed in the most profound oblivion. He seemed to want me to resume my life with Madame de 
Lérince as though nothing had happened …. She was fully disposed to 
receive me… . I could not bring myself to do it. Then he counseled me to 
seek distraction and amuse myself.  
Madame de Verquin, with whom, as I have mentioned before, I had 
never stopped corresponding, was still urging me to come and spend a 
few months with her. I mentioned this plan to her brother, he approved 
it, and a week later I set out for Lorraine. But the memory of my crime 
pursued me everywhere; nothing succeeded in restoring my peace of mind.  
I used to awake from a deep sleep and fancy I could st ill hear the 
moans and cries of poor Saint -Ange. I would see him lying at my feet 
covered with blood, he would reproach me for being cruel and assure me 
that the memory of this frightful act would haunt me to my dying day, 
and that I did not know the heart  I had destroyed.  
One night, among many, I dreamt of Senneval, that wretched lover I 
had never forgotten, since he alone was still enticing me back to Nancy…. In my dream, Senneval showed me two corpses at the same time, the body of Saint -Ange and that of a woman unknown to me.2 He 
shed bountiful tears upon both of them, and showed me nearby a coffin, 
bristling with thorns, which seemed to open for me. I awoke in a state of 
terrible agitation, my soul besieged by a thousand unclear and conflicting sentiment s, and a secret voice seemed to say to me: “Yes, so long as thou 
shalt live, this wretched victim will wring tears of blood from thine eyes, tears more burning and bitter every day; and thy remorse, like the knife’s edge, shall not be dulled but grow incre asingly sharper.”  
Such, then, was my state upon arriving at Nancy, Monsieur, and there 
a thousand new sorrows awaited me: once the heavy hand of fate 
descends upon us, the blows rain down with renewed fury until they 
have crushed us.  
I alighted at Madame de Verquin’s. In her last letter she had invited 
me to come and stay with her; it would be a great pleasure for her, so she wrote, to see me again. But, Merciful Heaven, under what conditions 
were we to share this joy! I arrived to find her on her deathbed.  Were it 
possible, Good Lord! She had written me no more than a fortnight 
before …telling me of her present pleasures and her plans for those yet to 
come. Thus is’t, then, with mortal man’s plans: ’tis  at the very moment 
they are being laid that pitiless de ath comes, in the midst of his 
amusements, and cuts the thread of all his days; whilst he, living without 
the least concern for that fatal moment, acting as though he would live 
forever, then vanishes into the dark cloud of immortality, uncertain of 
the fa te which awaits him there.  
2 Let the reade r keep in mind the phrase:  a woman unknown to me,  in order to avoid 
any confusion. Florville still has further losses to endure before the veil is lifted and 
discovers to her the woman she saw in her dream.                                           Allow me, Monsieur, to interrupt my story for a moment to speak of 
her death and to picture the appalling stoicism that accompanied this 
woman to the grave.  
Madame de Verquin, who was no longer young —she was then fifty -
two—after some escapade quite mad for her age, jumped into a pond to 
cool off. She straightway felt indisposed, was borne home in a terrible 
state, and the following day pneumonia set in. On the sixth day she was informed she had no more than twenty -four hours left to live. This news 
did not daunt her; she knew I was en route to see her, and she instructed her servants to receive me. I arrived the same evening which, according to the doctor’s prognosis, was to be her last here on earth. She had had 
herself taken into a room furnished with all possible elegance and taste. 
She was lying there, casually attired, on a voluptuous bed whose heavy 
lilac-colored curtains contrasted pleasantly with garlands of freshly cut 
flowers: bunches of roses, carnations, jasmine, and tub eroses embellished 
every corner of her room. She was plucking the petals of the flowers and putting them into a basket, then covering her bed and the rest of the 
room with them. The moment she saw me, she extended her hand in 
greeting.  
“Come over here, Flo rville,” she said to me, “embrace me on my bed 
of flowers …. How tall and lovely you have grown …. Ah, by my faith! 
virtue indeed agrees with you…. They’ve informed you of my condition, 
I’m sure they have, Florville …. I’m full aware of it myself…. In a few 
hours I’ll be gone …. I did not expect our reunion would be so brief….” 
And as she saw my eyes filling with tears: “Come, now, my silly chit,” she went on, “don’t be a child …. Do you then think me so wretched? 
Have I not enjoyed myself as much as any woman on the face of this 
earth? I lose naught save those years when I would have had to give up all my pleasures, and how would I have managed without them? In 
truth, I in no wise regret not having lived any longer; in a short while, no 
man would have deigned to give me a second look, and I have never 
aspired to live to an age when I would inspire naught but feelings of 
repulsion and disgust. Death, my child, is an object of fear only to those 
who believe. Constantly torn between the images of heaven and hell, 
never certain which of the two will open to receive them, they are 
ravaged by anxiety, whilst I, who expect nothing, who am certain of 
being no more miserable after my death than I was before I was born, 
shall go peacefully to sleep, with no regrets and, likewise, with no sentiments of pain or sorrow, with no remorse and no misgivings. I have 
asked that I be laid to rest beneath my bower of jasmine, they have 
already prepared me a grave there, Florville, and there shall I lie. And the atoms emanating from thi s decaying body will help to nourish and 
sustain this flower which, of all flowers, I most loved. Think,” she went on, stroking my cheeks with a bouquet of jasmine, “next year when you smell these flowers, you will be breathing the soul of your former frie nd; 
and as the scent rises to the fibers of your brain, it will implant in your 
mind some pleasant thoughts and force you to think of me.”  
Again tears welled up in my eyes …. I pressed this poor woman’s 
hands tightly in mine, and I searched for a way to per suade her to give 
up these dreadful, materialistic ideas for some less impious philosophy. 
But scarcely had I begun to give voice to this thought than she pushed 
me away in alarm …. 
“Oh, Florville,” she cried, “I beg of you, do not poison my final 
moments w ith your false beliefs, and let me die in peace. I did not loathe 
them my whole life through only to embrace them on my deathbed….”  I fell silent. What effect would my feeble eloquence have had, pitted 
as it was against such steadfastness of purpose? I would only have grieved 
Madame de Verquin without converting her; out of humanity, I 
desisted.  
She rang; straightway I heard a sweet, melodious music which seemed 
to emanate from a neighboring room.  
“This is how I intend to die, Florville,” said that Epicurea n. “Is’t not 
preferable to being surrounded by a bevy of black- robed priests, who 
would only fill my last moments with confusion, threats, and despair? …No, I wish to teach your pious souls that one can, without 
emulating them, die in peace; I wish to persuade them that ’tis  not 
religion that’s needed for one to die with an untroubled soul, but simply courage and reason.”  
The hour was growing late. A notary, whom she had sent for, entered 
the room. The music ended, she dictated a few final wishes: childless,  a 
widow for many years, and, consequently, mistress of many things, she made bequests to her friends and to her servants. Then she took a small 
coffer from a secretary near the bed.  
“This is all I now have left,” she said. “A little cash and a few jewels.  
Let us enjoy ourselves the rest of the evening. There are six of you here in the room, I shall divide all this into six parts, and we shall hold a 
lottery. We’ll have a draw, and each of you shall keep whatever he wins.”  
I marveled at the woman’s self -possession. It seemed to me incredible 
that one could have so many things wherewith to reproach oneself and yet arrive at one’s final moments in a state of utter calm —’twas  the 
baleful result of her lack of belief. If the horrible deaths of some evil 
people cause us to shudder, how much more frightened ought we to be 
by such steadfast obduracy!  None the less, her desires were carried out. A magnificent meal was 
served, in conformance with her orders. She ate heartily several courses, 
drank a number of Spanish wines and quaffed several different liqueurs, 
the doctor having told her that, in her condition, it made no difference.  
The lottery was held, each of us won about a hundred louis,  either in 
gold or in jewels. No sooner was this little game over than she wa s seized 
with a violent attack.  
“Well, Doctor, is this the end?” she said, maintaining her perfect 
calm.  
“Madame, I fear it is.”  
“Come hither then, Florville,” she said to me, stretching out her arms, 
“come receive my last farewell, I wish to expire on the  bosom of 
virtue ….” 
She clasped me in a tight embrace, and her lovely eyes closed forever.  
A stranger in that house, no longer having any reason to remain there, 
I straightway departed…. I leave it to your imagination to fancy the state I was in…and how much this spectacle had darkened my thoughts even 
further.  
Madame de Verquin’s manner of thinking and mine were too utterly 
opposed for me ever to love her sincerely. Had she not, in fact, been the prime cause of my disgrace, and all the misfortunes resulting therefrom? 
Yet this woman, the sister of the only man who had really ever cared for 
me, had always treated me with consideration and kindness, even unto 
her dying breath. My tears, therefore, were quite sincere, and became all 
the more bitter as I reflec ted that, with all her excellent qualities, that 
poor creature had been the unwilling cause of her own perdition and 
that, already cast forth from the bosom of the Almighty, she was 
doubtless even now suffering the punishments exacted for a life so deprave d. God in His infinite wisdom and goodness vouchsafed to 
comfort me and help me banish these troubling thoughts from my heart. 
I fell to my knees and dared pray to Him that He might forgive that 
unfortunate soul. I, who so sorely needed Heaven’s grace, dar ed to 
implore it for others, and to move it as much as ’twere  in my power I 
added ten louis  of my own to what I had won at Madame de Verquin’s, 
and straightway had it distributed among the poor of her parish.  
Moreover, this unfortunate woman’s wishes were scrupulously carried 
out; the arrangements she had made were too meticulous for them not to be. She was buried in her bower of jasmine, and on her tombstone was engraved the one word: VIXIT.  
Thuswise did the sister of my dearest friend meet her end: a fountain 
of intelligence and knowledge, possessed of great grace and talent, Madame de Verquin, had she chosen to live a different life, would have 
been deserving of the love and esteem of all who knew her; all she 
garnered was contempt. Her licentious habits increased with age —one is 
never more dangerous, when one has no principles, than at the age when 
one has ceased to blush. Depravity sits like gangrene upon the heart, one 
hones one’s initial misdeeds to a finer edge and, imperceptibly, one 
begins to commit  the most heinous crimes, still fancying they are but 
harmless misdemeanors.  
I was amazed by the incredible blindness of Madame de Verquin’s 
brother. ’Tis the distinctive characteristic of candor and goodness; decent 
people never suspect the evil whereof t hey themselves are incapable, and 
this explains why they are so easily duped by the first rogue who chances along to take advantage of them, and why ’tis  so easy, and so inglorious, 
to deceive them. The insolent rogue who attempts it is working only to debase himself and, without even proving his talent for vice, merely 
manages to make virtue seem all the more brilliant.  
In losing Madame de Verquin, I had lost all hope of ever learning any 
news of my son and my lover —you can imagine that, given the frightful 
condition in which I had found her, I had not dared to broach the 
subject.  
Completely crushed by this catastrophe, utterly exhausted by a voyage 
made in a most painful state of mind, I resolved to rest for a while in 
Nancy—at an inn where I had previousl y put up —seeing absolutely no 
one, since Monsieur de Saint -Prât had seemingly wished that I conceal 
my real name. ’Twas  from there I wrote my dear protector, determined 
not to leave until I had received his reply.  
A miserable girl, who is nothing to you, Monsieur,  I wrote to him, whose 
only claim upon you is for your pity, endlessly upsets your life; instead of writing to you of the grief you must be feeling over the loss you have just 
suffered, she dares speak to you of herself, ask you what you would have  her do, 
and awaits your orders, etc. 
But it was ordained that misfortune would stalk me wheresoever I 
went, and that I would be either the eternal victim of or witness to its sinister effects.  
One evening I was returning to the inn rather late, having ventured 
out for a breath of fresh air, accompanied by my chambermaid and a footman I had hired upon my arrival in Nancy. Everyone else had 
already retired for the night.  
As I was about to go up to my room, a tall and still very handsome 
woman about fifty yea rs of age, whom I recognized from having seen her 
since I had moved into the inn—this woman, I say, suddenly emerged 
from her room, which was adjacent to mine, and, armed with a dagger, burst into a room across the corridor. My natural reaction was to see …. I 
hastened forward, with my maid and footman trailing close behind. In 
the twinkling of an eye, before we even had time to call to her or come 
to her aid, we saw the poor creature throw herself upon another woman and, twenty times over, drive the dagger into her heart, then cross back 
over to her own room, so completely distraught that she even failed to 
notice our presence. Our first thought was that the poor creature had gone stark raving mad. We could not understand a crime for which we 
could detect no  motive. My maid and footman were on the verge of 
crying out. For reasons I was unable to fathom, some pressing urgency 
caused me to command them to remain silent. Taking them both by the 
arm, I herded them with me into my room and immediately closed the 
door behind us.  
A frightful commotion was soon heard. The woman who had just 
been stabbed somehow managed to stagger out onto the stairs, screaming horribly, and, before she breathed her last, named her assailant. And as we were known to be the last to ente r the inn before 
the murder was committed, we were arrested at the same time as the 
culprit.  
None the less, the dying woman’s accusation freed us from any taint 
of suspicion, and the authorities merely ordered us not to leave the inn 
until after the trial.  
Cast into prison, the murderess refused to admit her guilt, and 
steadfastly maintained that she was innocent. There were no other witnesses save me and my servants. We were summoned to testify; I had 
great difficulty concealing the uneasiness wherewith I was being 
devoured …I who deserved death fully as much as this woman whom my 
forced testimony would surely send to the gallows, for, although the circumstances were somewhat different, I was guilty of the same crime. I 
have no idea to what lengths I would h ave gone to avoid making this 
cruel deposition. It was as though each word I uttered in testimony were another drop of blood wrung from my heart. Still, there was no way around it, the testimony had to be given: we confessed to what we had 
seen.  
However convinced were the authorities, moreover, that ’twas  this 
woman who had committed the crime —her motive, apparently, was to 
rid herself of a rival— however convinced they were, I say, that she was 
the guilty party, we later learned beyond any shadow of a doubt  that 
without our testimony it would have been impossible to convict her. There was, it seems, a man somehow implicated in the affair, who had 
fled following the murder and who might otherwise have been a likely suspect. But our testimony, and especially t hat of my footman—who was 
attached to the inn where the crime had taken place —these cruel 
depositions which we had no choice but to make or run the risk of implicating ourselves, sealed the poor woman’s doom.  
The last time I confronted her, this woman exam ined me in 
considerable amazement and asked how old I was.  
“Thirty -four,” I told her.  
“Thirty -four? …And you’re a native of this region? …” 
“No, Madame.”  
“Your name is Florville?”  
“Yes, ’tis thus I am called.”  
“I do not know you,” she went on, “but you are h ighly esteemed in 
this town and considered a most respectable young lady. That, 
unfortunately for me, is quite enough.”  
Then, in a state of considerable agitation, she continued:  “Mademoiselle, in the depths of this frightful situation wherein I find 
mysel f, you appeared to me in a dream. You were there with my 
son…for I am a mother and, as you see, a most unhappy one …your face 
was the same …you were wearing the same dress …and the scaffold 
loomed before my eyes ….” 
“A dream,” I cried, “a dream, Madame!” immediately recalling my 
own dream; I was struck by this woman’s features, I recognized her as 
the woman who had appeared with Senneval in my own dream, near the 
coffin bristling with thorns …. Tears flowed from my eyes …the more I 
examined this woman, the more I  was tempted to retract my 
testimony …. I wanted to request that I be put to death in her place …. I 
wanted to flee, but could not tear myself away….  
When the authorities saw the terrible state this confrontation had put 
me in, they confined themselves —since  they were persuaded of my 
innocence —to separating us. I returned home in a state of complete 
despair, prey to a whole host of confused sentiments the cause of which I 
was unable to discover. The following day, that poor woman was put to 
death.  
That same day, I received the reply from Monsieur de Saint -Prât. He 
urged me to return to Paris. As Nancy was anything but a pleasant place for me after the baleful scenes I had witnessed there, I left it without a 
moment’s delay and headed for the capital, pursued b y the fresh ghost of 
that woman, who seemed with every passing moment to be crying out to 
me: 
’Tis thou, wretched girl, ’tis  thou who hast sent me to my death, and thou 
knowest not whom thy hand has brought low, even unto the grave.  
Overwhelmed by such an accumulation of calamities, persecuted by as 
many sorrows, I besought Monsieur de Saint -Prât to find me some retreat where I might finish out my days in the most complete solitude, 
and in the strictest observance of my religious duties. He suggested the 
one wherein you discovered me, Monsieur; I entered it that same week 
and did not leave it save twice a month to visit my dear protector, and to spend a few moments with Madame de Lérince. But Heaven, which 
seemed intent upon raining down ever new afflictions  upon me, denied 
me the pleasure of long enjoying my friend’s company: I had the 
misfortune to lose her last year. Because of her tender feelings for me, 
she claimed my presence during those cruel moments, and ’twas  also in 
my arms that she breathed her la st. 
But—and who would have believed it, Monsieur? —her death was not 
as peaceful as that of Madame de Verquin. The latter, expecting 
nothing, had no fear of losing everything; the former seemed to tremble at the thought of seeing the certain object of her h ope disappear. In the 
woman who should have been beset by remorse from all quarters, there was none, so far as I could see; Madame de Lérince, who had never had any cause for remorse, was filled with it. In dying, Madame de Verquin 
had but one regret, and that was that she had been unable to do enough 
evil. Madame de Lérince died lamenting the good she had left undone. 
The former, deploring naught save the loss of her pleasure, covered 
herself with flowers; the latter wished to die upon a cross of ashes, full of 
regret at the memory of those many hours she had not devoted to virtue.  
This contrast made a profound impression upon me; my conscience 
weakened. “And why?” I asked myself, “why should the practice of virtue not result in a feeling of peace at such m oments, when it seems granted 
to the partisans of evil?” But just then, strengthened by a heavenly voice 
which seemed to thunder forth from the depths of my heart, I cried out: 
“Is’t for me to try and fathom the will of the Almighty? What I saw only assure s me all the more of the value of righteousness: Madame de 
Lérince’s fears are virtue’s anxiety and concern; whilst Madame de 
Verquin’s cruel apathy is but the final aberration of crime. Ah, if ’tis  
given to me to choose at my final moments, may God grant me the grace 
rather to be afraid like Madame de Lérince than benumbed like 
Madame de Verquin.”  
Such, then, is the last of my adventures, Monsieur. For the past two 
years I have been living in the Convent of the Assumption, where my 
benefactor placed me. Ye s, Monsieur, for two years now I have lived 
there, without having known a single moment’s repose, without having 
spent a single night without the image of poor Saint -Ange and that of 
the unfortunate woman who, by my testimony, was condemned in Nancy, appearing to me. ’Twas  thus you found me; these are the secrets 
I had to reveal to you. Was it not my bounden duty to relate them to you 
before yielding to the sentiments wherewith you are deluded? Will you 
now consider whether ’tis  possible for me to be worthy  of you? …Ponder 
whether she whose soul is so overcome with affliction can ever bring into 
your life any moments of joy. Oh! Monsieur, rid yourself of your 
illusions; let me return to the harsh retreat which alone befits me. Were 
you to wrench me from it, y ou would only have before you the constant 
spectacle of remorse, pain, and misfortune.  
Mademoiselle de Florville could not help finishing her story in a state 
of considerable agitation. By nature quick -witted, sensitive, and delicate, 
she could not avoid b eing deeply affected by the recital of her woes.  
Monsieur de Courval, who saw no more plausible reason in the later 
events described than in the former which might alter his plans, did all 
in his power to reassure the woman he loved.  “I repeat to you, Made moiselle,” he said to her, “there are indeed 
some singular and fateful things in what you have just told me. But I fail 
to see a single one which should trouble your conscience or harm your 
reputation…. An affair when you were sixteen…so be it, but think h ow 
excusable it was: your age; the blandishments of Madame de Verquin; a 
young man, perhaps quite charming, whom you have never laid eyes on 
again, isn’t that so, Mademoiselle?” Monsieur de Courval added with a trace of concern in his voice, “and whom you may reasonably expect 
never to see again?”  
“Oh, never, most assuredly never !” Florville replied, suspecting the 
reasons for Monsieur de Courval’s anxiety.  
“Well, then, Mademoiselle, let us conclude our arrangements,” 
Monsieur de Courval resumed. “Let us complete them, I beg of you, and 
let me persuade you, without wasting another moment, that there is 
nothing in your story which can ever diminish in the heart of an honest 
man either the extreme consideration due to such a paragon of virtue or the homage dem anded by so many charming qualities.”  
Mademoiselle de Florville asked permission to return again to Paris to 
consult with her protector one last time, firmly promising that, so far as she were concerned, no further obstacle would be raised in view of the 
proposed match. Monsieur de Courval could not very well refuse her 
permission to fulfill this worthy obligation.  
She departed, and a week later returned with Monsieur de Saint -Prât. 
Monsieur de Courval showered him with courteous attentions; he made 
him ful l aware how flattered he was to ally himself with the person to 
whom Monsieur de Saint -Prât had vouchsafed his love and protection, 
and he urged him to continue to acknowledge that charming creature as his relative and ward. Saint -Prât replied to Monsieur de Courval’s attentive remarks in the manner expected of such a gentleman, and went 
on to add even further encomiums to his assessment of Mademoiselle de 
Florville’s character.  
At last the day that Monsieur de Courval had so desired arrived; the 
ceremony w as performed, and when the marriage contract was read, he 
was amazed to learn that Monsieur de Saint -Prât, without having told a 
soul, had added, in consideration of this marriage, four thousand 
pounds’ income to the pension of like amount which Mademoisel le de 
Florville was already receiving from him, and a legacy of a hundred thousand francs payable to her after his death.  
Upon seeing these newest proofs of her protector’s generosity, this 
interesting girl could not restrain her tears, which flowed abunda ntly, 
and, in her heart of hearts, was delighted to be able to offer the man who had deigned to marry her, a fortune at least the equal of his own.  
Sentiments of cordiality and unfettered joy, and assurances of mutual 
esteem and attachment marked the celeb ration of this marriage …this 
fateful marriage whose torches the Furies secretly extinguished.  
Monsieur de Saint -Prât, as well as the bridegroom’s friends, spent a 
week with Courval, but the newlyweds did not return to Paris with 
them. They decided to remai n in the country until the onset of winter, 
to put some necessary order into their affairs and thus start off on the right foot when they set up housekeeping in Paris. Monsieur de Saint -
Prât was entrusted with the task of finding them a pleasant house not far 
from his own, in order that they might see each other often.  
With the pleasing prospect of these arrangements before them, 
Monsieur and Madame de Courval had already been at their country residence for three months, and had already good reason to belie ve a 
child was on the way —a piece of news they lost no time in communicating to kindly Monsieur de Saint -Prât—when an unexpected 
event cruelly occurred to dash the couple’s happiness, turning the tender 
roses of hymen into the frightful cypresses of mourning.  
Here my pen pauses …. I should spare the reader, ask him to proceed 
no further …. Yes, let him break off the story at this point, if he prefers 
not to shudder with horror …. Sad condition of man here on 
earth …cruel twists of unpredictable fate …. Why must Florville, the 
most virtuous, charming, and sensitive creature alive, find herself, through a most incredible chain of circumstances, the most abominable 
monster Nature has ever conceived?  
One evening, this tender and loving wife was sitting next to her 
husband reading an unbelievably gloomy English novel which at the 
time was being much discussed.  
“I must confess,” she said, dropping her book, “here is a creature 
almost as miserable as I.”  
“As miserable as you,” quoth Monsieur de Courval, clasping his 
beloved wife in his arms, “O Florville, I thought I had helped you to put 
all your tribulations behind you …. I see now I was mistaken …. But did 
you have to tell me in such brutal terms? …” 
But Madame de Courval seemed oblivious to his entreaties; nor did 
she re spond to his caresses with a single word, but mechanically pushed 
him away from her in terror and threw herself down upon the sofa on the far side of the room, where she burst into tears. In vain did her 
worthy husband come and cast himself at her feet, in  vain did he beg this 
woman whom he adored to calm herself, or at least apprise him of the 
cause of such a fit of despair. Madame de Courval continued to push 
him away, to turn aside when he essayed to dry her tears, to such a 
degree that Monsieur de Courv al, by then being thoroughly persuaded that some distressing memory of Florville’s earlier passion had returned 
to inflame her heart anew, could not refrain from chiding her about it.  
Madame de Courval listened to his reproaches, but when he was 
finished s he rose to her feet.  
“No, Monsieur,” she said to her husband, “you are wrong in judging 
in this way the fit of depression wherewith I have just been overwhelmed. ’Tis not memory that alarms me, but forebodings which 
terrify me… . I see myself happy with you , Monsieur …yes, very 
happy …and I was not born to be happy. ’Tis  impossible that I remain so 
very long, for it is ordained that the dawn of my happiness will never be aught but the lightning which precedes the thunderbolt. ’Tis  this 
thought which caused me to tremble: I fear we are not destined to live together. Today your wife, perhaps tomorrow I shall no longer be. Deep in my heart, a secret voice cries out, saying that for me all this happiness 
is but a shadow, which will vanish like the flower which blooms and 
withers in the space of a single day. Therefore, do not accuse me of being capricious, nor say that I am growing cold or indifferent, 
Monsieur. My own guilt is an excess of sensibility, an unfortunate 
tendency to see things in the most sinister ligh t possible, the cruel result 
of my reverses of fortune ….” 
Monsieur de Courval was still at his wife’s feet, trying unsuccessfully 
by his words and caresses to allay her fears, when suddenly —it was just 
before seven o’clock of an October evening —a servant e ntered to say 
that a man he had never seen before most urgently requested to have a 
word with Monsieur de Courval …. Florville shuddered…in spite of 
herself, tears streamed down her cheeks, she stumbled and almost fell; 
she tried to say something, but the words died on her lips.  More concerned about his wife’s condition than with what he had just 
learned, Monsieur de Courval replied somewhat testily that the stranger 
should wait, and turned back to aid his wife. But Madame de Courval, 
fearing to succumb to t he secret emotion wherewith she was gripped, 
and desiring to conceal her deepest feelings in the presence of the 
stranger who had just been announced, found the strength to struggle to 
her feet, and said:  
“’Tis nothing, Monsieur, nothing. Show the gentlema n in.”  
The servant left, to return a moment later with a man about thirty -
seven or thirty -eight, whose charming countenance bore the telltale signs 
of some deep -rooted sorrow.  
“Father! …” cried the stranger, casting himself at Monsieur de 
Courval’s feet. “Will you recognize a miserable son who has been separated from you for twenty -two years, a son more than punished for 
his cruel sins by the reverses of fortune he has suffered constantly since then?”  
“What! You, my son! …Great God! …What circumstance …thankles s 
creature…caused you to recall my existence?”  
“My heart …this heart which, though guilty, has none the less never 
ceased to love you… . Listen to me, Father …pray do. I have greater 
misfortunes than my own to discover to you; please sit down and hear me out.  Pray forgive me, Madame,” continued young Courval, turning 
to his father’s wife, “if I am obliged, though ’tis  the first time in my life I 
have had the opportunity to pay you my respects, to reveal in your presence some terrible family misfortunes, which I can no longer conceal 
from my father.”  “Speak then, Monsieur, speak,” Madame de Courval managed to 
stammer, casting a wild glance at this young man. “Misfortune’s 
language is not new to me; I have known it since childhood.”  
Then our traveler, in a state of uncontrollable uneasiness, stared 
fixedly at Madame de Courval, and said to her:  
“You, unhappy, Madame! …Oh, Merciful Heaven, can you be as 
unhappy as we?”  
They sat down. Madame de Courval’s state would be difficult to 
describe…. She glanced at the visit or…quickly she lowered her eyes to 
the floor …. She gave a deep, racking sigh. Monsieur de Courval was 
weeping, and his son tried to calm him, beseeching him to listen closely 
to what he had to say. Finally the conversation became somewhat more 
orderly.  
“I have so many things to tell you, Monsieur,” said young Courval, 
“that I trust you will allow me to gloss over the details and go straight to the heart of the matter. And I ask that both you and Madame give your word not to interrupt me before I have reache d the end of my tale.  
“I left you when I was fifteen, Monsieur; my first impulse was to 
follow my mother, whom I was blind enough to prefer to you. You and she had been separated for many years. I rejoined her in Lyon, where her 
riotous living so frightene d me that I found myself obliged to leave her, 
were I to preserve whatever sentiments I had left for her. I went to 
Strasbourg, where the Normandy regiment was stationed ….” 
Madame de Courval gave a start, but kept control of herself.  
“The colonel seemed interested in me,” young Courval went on. “I 
made myself known to him, and he gave me a commission as a second lieutenant. The following year, I accompanied the regiment to Nancy, 
where it was transferred, and there I fell in love with a young relative of Madame de Verquin. I seduced this young girl, had a son by her, and 
cruelly abandoned her.”  
At these words, Madame de Courval trembled, a low sigh welled from 
her breast, but she otherwise managed to maintain her composure.  
“This unhappy affair was the cause  of all my misfortunes. I placed the 
poor girl’s child with a woman near Metz, who promised to take care of 
him, and a short while later rejoined my regiment. I was condemned for my conduct: since the girl had not been able to return to Nancy, I was 
accuse d of having been the cause of her ruin. Too charming and likable a 
creature not to have caught the fancy of the entire town, she did not lack 
for defenders, who were bent upon avenging her honor. I fought a duel 
and killed my opponent. I then fled to Torino with my son, whom I had 
returned to fetch near Metz.  
“For twelve years I served the King of Sardinia. I shall spare you the 
detailed description of my tribulations during this period. Suffice it to say they were infinite. ’Tis  upon leaving France that one learns to miss it. 
Still, my son was growing into manhood, and a most promising young 
man he was too. In Torino I had met a French woman who had 
accompanied that Princess of France who had married into the Court of 
Sardinia, and that worthy person having  taken a sympathetic interest in 
my misfortunes, I dared ask her to take my son with her to France, in 
order to complete his education. I promised to put my affairs sufficiently in order that I would be able to come and reclaim the boy from her care 
within six years. She consented, took my poor child to Paris with her, 
spared no effort to bring him up properly, and kept me fully and 
regularly informed of his progress.  
“I appeared a year earlier than I had promised. I arrived at the lady’s 
house, full of the  sweet expectation of embracing my son, of clasping in my arms this token of a love betrayed …but which still burned in my 
heart. ‘Your son is dead,’ quoth the worthy friend, her eyes 
overbrimming with tears. ‘He was the victim of the same passion which 
was the cause of his father’s misfortunes. We had taken him to the 
country with us; there he fell in love with a charming girl whose name I 
have promised not to divulge. Carried away by the violence of his 
passion, he tried to ravish by force what had been de nied him by 
virtue …. A blow, struck solely with the intention of frightening him off, 
went straight into his heart, and killed him outright.’”  
At this point, Madame de Courval fell into a sort of trance, which for 
a moment made them fear she had suddenly been struck dead: her eyes 
were wide and staring fixedly; the blood had frozen in her veins. 
Monsieur de Courval, who had realized all too clearly the fatal connections binding together these adventures, interrupted his son and 
hastened to his wife’s side. She came back to her senses and, with an 
heroic display of courage, managed to say:  
“Let your son continue, Monsieur. Perhaps I have not yet reached the 
end of my trials.”  
All the while, young Courval, though he failed to understand why this 
lady was so di sturbed about events which seemed to relate to her but 
indirectly, but discerning something incomprehensible for him in the features of his father’s wife, looked at her intently, deeply moved.  
Monsieur de Courval took his son’s hand and, distracting his 
attention from Florville, commanded him to continue, but to 
concentrate on essentials and eliminate the details, because his tales were 
the repository of mysterious circumstances which were of the gravest 
import.  “In a state of utter despair over the death o f my son,” the traveler 
continued, “and having no further reason to remain in France —save for 
you, Father, whom I did not dare to face and whose wrath I greatly 
feared —I resolved to travel in Germany …. Ill-starred author of my days, 
I now come to the cruel est part of my story,” said young Courval, 
bathing his father’s hands with his tears. “Summon your courage, I beseech you.  
“When I arrived at Nancy, I learned that a Madame Desbarres —that 
was the name which my mother, as soon as she had led you to believe she was dead, had assumed in her disorderly life —I learned, I say, that 
this same Madame Desbarres had just been cast into prison for having 
stabbed her rival, and that she was perhaps going to be executed the 
following day.”  
“Oh, Monsieur,” poor Florville  cried out at this point, burying herself 
in her husband’s breast, her body racked with sobs, “Oh, Monsieur, do you now see the full measure of my miseries?”  
“Yes, Madame, I do indeed,” said Monsieur de Courval. “I see 
everything, Madame, but I beg you to let my son finish.”  
Florville contained herself, but she was scarcely breathing, her every 
feeling was impaired, her nerves were stretched to the breaking point.  
“Go on, my son, go on,” quoth the unhappy father. “In a moment I 
shall explain everything to you.”  
“Very well, Monsieur,” young Courval went on. “I inquired whether 
there were not some mistake in names, but unfortunately it was only too true that the criminal was my mother. I asked permission to see her, the 
request was granted. I threw myself in h er arms …. ‘I am guilty of the 
crime for which I am going to die,’ this unhappy creature said to me, ‘but 
there is a terrible quirk of fate in the affair which is responsible for my death. There was another person under suspicion; all evidence pointed to 
him. But a woman and her two servants who, as chance would have it, 
were residing in the inn, witnessed my crime, though I was so distraught that I failed to notice them. Their testimony alone is responsible for my death. No matter, let us not waste our last  moments together in useless 
regrets. I have some secrets of great consequence to divulge: now listen closely to what I have to say, my boy.  
“‘The moment my eyes have closed forever, go and seek out my 
husband. Tell him that, amongst my many crimes, is one  whereof he is 
ignorant and which I must finally confess. You have a sister, Courval …. 
She was born a year after you …. I doted on you, and was afraid this girl 
might be a menace to you, that her father, at the time of her marriage, might settle a dowry upo n her, using part of the inheritance which 
should have been yours alone. In order to keep your legacy intact, I 
resolved both to get rid of this girl and to make certain that in the future 
my husband would cull no further fruits from our marital bonds. My disorders led me into other sins, and prevented me from feeling the 
effects of these new crimes by causing me to commit even more terrible 
ones. But as for my daughter, I determined absolutely to murder her. I 
was about to put this infamous plan into effec t, in concert with the wet 
nurse, whom I had amply compensated, when this woman told me that 
she knew a man who, married for years, was childless, though he wanted nothing more than to have children. Why didn’t I kill two birds with 
one stone, she said to me: get rid of my daughter and perhaps make the 
man happy?  
“‘I straightway accepted her suggestion. That same evening, my 
daughter was placed on this man’s doorstep, with a letter in her cradle.  “‘The minute I am dead, fly to Paris and ask your father’s fo rgiveness 
for me, beg him not to curse my memory and to go fetch that child and 
bring her back home into his own house.’  
“With these words, my mother embraced me …and tried to calm the 
frightful agitation into which I had been plunged by all she had reveale d 
to me …. Oh, Father, the following day she was executed. I was felled by 
a terrible illness, which reduced me to the edge of the grave, where I 
hovered for two years between life and death, with neither the strength 
nor the courage to write you.  
“Upon rec overing my health, my initial act was to come and cast 
myself at your feet, to beg forgiveness for your poor, unfortunate wife, 
and to discover to you the name of the person who can give you news of 
my sister: Monsieur de Saint -Prât.”  
Monsieur de Courval faltered, his senses began to fail him and grow 
benumbed, he was nigh unto unconscious …his condition became truly 
alarming.  
As for Florville, who had been suffering the tortures of hell for the 
past quarter hour, she arose with the tranquillity of someone who has 
just come to a decision.  
“Very well, Monsieur,” she said to Courval, “do you now believe there 
exists somewhere in the world a criminal more atrocious than poor 
Florville? …Let me tell you then who I am, Senneval: at once your sister, 
the girl you se duced in Nancy, the murderer of your son, and the 
loathsome creature who dispatched your mother to the gallows …. Yes, 
gentlemen, these are my crimes: no matter which of you I cast my eyes 
upon, I see only an object of horror. Either I see my lover as my br other, 
or I see my husband as the author of my days. And if I look at myself, I 
see naught but the execrable monster who stabbed her own son and was the instrument of her mother’s death. Do you think Heaven can have a 
sufficient store of torments for me? D o you think, given the tortures 
wherewith my heart is laden, that I can go on living a moment longer? No, there remains but one further crime to commit, a crime which will avenge all the others.”  
And so saying, the poor girl leapt forward, snatched up one of 
Senneval’s pistols, and blew out her brains before either of them had time to realize what she was about. She died without uttering another 
word.  
Monsieur de Courval fainted. His son, stunned by the scenes he had 
just witnessed, called for help as best he could. Florville was beyond all 
help: already the shadows of death were overspreading her bloodstained 
face, whose features were now convulsed not only because of her violent end but also because of the sentiments of despair which filled her heart 
at the moment of her death.  
Monsieur de Courval was transported to his bed, where for two 
months he lingered close to the grave. His son, in an equally cruel state, none the less was fortunate enough to see his tenderness and loving care 
rewarded by his father’ s recovery.  
Both of them, however, after having suffered such cruel and 
manifold blows of misfortune, resolved to withdraw from the world. A 
rigorous, self- imposed solitude has removed them forever from the eyes 
of their friends, and there, in the bosom of  piety and virtue, they are 
peacefully living out the thread of their sad and painful days, of their lives which were given them only to convince both them and all who 
read this unhappy tale that ’tis  only in the darkness of the grave that 
man can find the  peace which the wickedness of his fellow men, the disorder of his passions, and above all the fate decreed unto him, will 
deny him eternally here upon this earth.
 
  Part Three  
The 120 Days of Sodom  
(1785)   
On the 22nd of October, 1785, Donatien -Alphonse -François de Sade, for 
more than seven years a prisoner of the Royal dungeons, and since February of 
1784 confined in the Bastille, began the final revision of his first major work, which he entitled The  120 Days of Sodom. There are those who consider it his 
masterpiece; there can be no doubt that it is the foundation upon which the rest of his achievement reposes.  
If this was the first major work, it was also the decisive step: three years 
earlier Sade h ad written the  Dialogue between a Priest and a Dying Man 
in which the ferocity of his atheism and the rigor of his vision were evident, but with  The 120 Days he moved further, much further, into a realm of 
philosophic absolutism from which there could be n o retreat. Sade was here 
declaring all- out war on the society that had judged and imprisoned him, and 
on that virtue which it preached as the ultimate good. If, up to this time, he 
had been drawn instinctively to the twin poles of pleasure and vice, now th e 
full power of his intellect entered into the fray. Henceforth he would do all he 
could to “outrage the laws of both Nature and religion.” Sade was out to shock, 
as no writer had ever tried to shock his readers before in the history of 
literature. He was fully aware of what he was about. After describing his 
main characters and his plan of action in the opening pages of  The 120 Days, 
the author warns:  
I advise the overmodest to lay my book aside at once if he would not be scandalized, for ’tis  already clea r there’s not much of the chaste in 
our plan, and we dare hold ourselves answerable in advance that 
there’ll be still less in the execution …. And now, friend -reader, you 
must prepare your heart and your mind for the most impure tale that 
has ever been told  since our world began, a book the likes of which are 
met with neither amongst the ancients nor amongst us moderns …. If Sade was cognizant of the importance of the work he was undertaking, 
he was also aware of the dangers of seizure to which such a manuscript was 
constantly subject, given the conditions and place of its composition. He 
therefore devised a method which, he thought, would at least minimize the chances of having the manuscript lost or taken from him. Using sheets of thin 
paper twelve centimete rs wide, he pasted them together into a kind of scroll 
just over twelve meters long, which he thought would be relatively easy to 
conceal. From the 22nd of October on, he worked for twenty consecutive 
evenings, from seven till ten, at the end of which time  he had covered one side 
of the scroll with a microscopic writing; he then continued on the other side, 
until he had completed the manuscript
1 by the 28th of November. But all his 
precautions were in vain: when the Bastille was stormed, most of the 
manuscr ipts Sade had left behind were lost or destroyed, and neither the notes 
nor the roll itself ever came into the author’s hands again. It must have been 
especially to the scroll of  The 120 Days that Sade was referring when he 
wrote to his steward, Gaufridy, in May, 1790, that its loss had caused him to 
shed “tears of blood”:  
There are moments when I am moved by a wish to join the 
Trappists, and I cannot say but what I may go off some fine day and 
vanish altogether from the scene. Never was I such a misanthrop e as 
since I have returned into the midst of men; and if in their eyes I now 
have the look of a stranger, they may be very sure they produce the same effect upon me. I was not idle during my detention; consider, 
my dear lawyer, I had readied fifteen volumes for the printer; now 
1 Prior to transferring the final draft to the sc roll, Sade had prepared copious notes; 
this doubtless explains the speed with which he transcribed the material onto the roll 
of paper.                                           that I am at large, hardly a quarter of those manuscripts remains to 
me. Through unpardonable thoughtlessness, Madame de Sade let 
some of them become lost, let others be seized; thirteen years of toil 
gone for naught! The bulk of tho se writings had remained behind in 
my room at the Bastille when, on the fourth of July, I was removed 
from there to Charenton; on the fourteenth the Bastille is stormed, 
overrun, and my manuscripts, six hundred books I owned, two thousand pounds worth of f urniture, precious portraits, the lot is 
lacerated, burned, carried off, pillaged: a clean sweep, not a straw left: and all that owing to the sheer negligence of Madame de Sade. She had had ten whole days to retrieve my possessions; she could not 
but have known that the Bastille, which they had been cramming 
with guns, powder, soldiers, was being prepared either for an  attack 
or for a  defense. Why then did she not hasten to get my belongings 
out of harm’s way? my manuscripts?—my manuscripts over whose 
loss I shed tears of blood! Other beds, tables, chests of drawers can be 
found, but ideas once gone are not found again…. No, my friend, no, 
I shall never be able to figure to you my despair at their loss, for me it 
is irreparable ….
2  
Justine, Juliette, Philosophy in the Bedroom, and  La Nouvelle Justine 
all represent attempts by Sade to reconstitute,  in one form or another, the 
elements he had expounded in  The 120 Days of Sodom, which he assumed 
lost forever. But, though Sade would never know it, the precious ro ll had not 
been destroyed. It was found, in the same cell of the Bastille where Sade had 
been kept prisoner, by one Arnoux de Saint -Maximin, and thence came into 
2 The Marquis de Sade:  The Complete Justine, Philosophy in the Bedroom, and Other 
Writings.  New York, Grove Press, 1965,  p. 144.                                           the possession of the Villeneuve -Trans family, in whose care it remained for 
three generations . At the turn of the present century, it was sold to a German 
collector, and in 1904 it was published by the German psychiatrist, Dr. Iwan 
Bloch, under the pseudonym of Eugene Dühren. Bloch justified his publishing the work by its “scientific importance …to doctors, jurists, and anthropologists,” 
pointing out in his notes the “amazing analogies” between cases cited by Sade and those recorded a century later by Krafft -Ebing. Bloch’s text, however, as 
Lely notes, is replete with “thousands of errors” which hop elessly denature and 
distort it.  
After Bloch’s death, the manuscript remained in Germany until 1929, 
when Maurice Heine, at the behest of the Viscount Charles de ***, went to 
Berlin to acquire it. From 1931 to 1935, Heine’s masterful and authoritative 
text of the work appeared in three quarto volumes, in what must be considered 
the original edition of the work.
3 This is what Heine had to say of  The 120 
Days:  
It is a document of singular value, as well as the first positive effort (aside from that of the fat her-confessors) to classify sexual anomalies. 
The man responsible for having undertaken this methodical observation, a century before Krafft -Ebing and Freud, fully deserves 
the honor bestowed upon him by scholars of having the gravest of 
these psychopathic  conditions known by the term “sadism.”
4  
And Lely, on  The 120 Days:  
3 Les 120 Journées de Sodom, ou l’ École du Libertinage, par le marquis de Sade. Édition 
critique établie sur le manuscrit original autographe par Maurice Heine, À  Paris, par S et C, 
aux dépens des bibliophiles souscripteurs,  1931–1931.  
4 Ibid.                                          Despite the reservations one has to make,5 The 120 Days contains 
some of the most admirable pages the Marquis de Sade ever wrote. 
The texture, the breadth, the sweep of the sentences, all  seem more 
allied to his correspondence …than to his other works. The 
Introduction, wherein we see deployed to full advantage the resources of his art, in its newest and most spontaneous form, is without doubt 
Sade’s masterpiece ….
6  
There are other works mo re finished, of greater literary merit and with a 
philosophic content more developed, but Messrs. Heine and Lely are correct:  
The 120 Days of Sodom is the seminal work in all Sade’s writing. It is perhaps his masterpiece; at the very least, it is the cornerstone on which the 
massive edifice he constructed was founded.   
5 Lely’s reservations center around the exaggerated emphasis Sade placed, in  The 120 
Days,  upon the coprophilic aberration.  
6 Lely,  op. cit., Vol. II, p. 334.                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Introduction  
Portraits of principal personages  
Statutes  
A speech by the Duc de Blangis  
Dramatis Personae: A recapitulation  
PART THE FIRST  
THE 150 SIMPLE PASSIONS COMP OSING THE NARRATION OF MAD AME 
DUCLOS FOR THE MONTH  OF NOVEMBER  
The First Day ( The company rose the 1st of November …) 
The Second Day ( The company rose at the customary hour …) 
The Third Day ( The Duc was abroad at nine o’clock …) 
SCHEDULE OF WORKS TO  BE ACCOMPLISHED  DURING THE 
REMAINDER OF THE PAR TY 
The Fourth Day ( Being full eager to be able to distinguish …) 
The Fifth Day ( That morning it was Curval’s duty …) 
The Sixth Day ( It was Monseigneur’s turn to assist…)  
The Seventh Day ( The friends had ceased to participate… ) 
The Eighth Day ( The previous day’s examples having made a deep 
impression …) 
The Ninth Day ( That morning Duclos expressed her opinion …) 
The Tenth Day ( The farther we advance, the more thoroughly we may 
inform …) The Eleventh Day ( They did not rise till late  that day,…)  
The Twelfth Day ( The new mode of life I was about to begin, …) 
The Thirteenth Day ( The Président, who that night lay …) 
The Fourteenth Day ( It was discovered upon that day that the weather …) 
The Fifteenth Day ( Rarely would the day following corr ection …) 
The Sixteenth Day ( Our heroes rose as bright and fresh… ) 
The Seventeenth Day ( The terrible antipathy the Président had for 
Constance …) 
The Eighteenth Day ( Beautiful, radiant, bejeweled, grown more 
brilliant… ) 
The Nineteenth Day ( That morning, afte r having made some 
observations …) 
The Twentieth Day ( Something very humorous indeed had occurred …) 
The Twenty -first Day ( Preparations for that ceremony were started early …) 
The Twenty -second Day ( As a result of these all -night bacchanals …) 
The Twenty -third  Day ( “But how is it possible to shout and roar …”) 
The Twenty -fourth Day ( Piety is indeed a true disease of the soul …) 
The Twenty -fifth Day ( However, a new intrigue was quietly taking 
form …) 
The Twenty -sixth Day ( In that nothing was more delicious …) 
The Tw enty-seventh Day ( The denunciations, authorized on the previous 
day…) 
The Twenty -eighth Day ( ’Twas  a wedding day,…)  The Twenty -ninth Day ( There is a proverb …) 
The Thirtieth Day ( I am not sure, Messieurs, …) 
MISTAKES I HAVE MADE  
PART THE SECOND  
THE 150 COMPL EX PASSIONS COMPOSIN G THE NARRATION OF 
MADAME CHAMPVILLE FO R THE MONTH OF DECEM BER 
 
PART THE THIRD  
THE 150 CRIMINAL PASSIONS CO MPOSING THE NARRATIO N OF 
MADAME MARTAINE FOR THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
 
PART THE FOURTH  
THE 150 MURDEROUS PASSIONS C OMPOSING THE NARRA TION OF 
MADAME DESGRANGES FO R THE MONTH OF FEBRU ARY 
 
NOTES , SUPPLEMENTS  
ADDENDA    
INTRODUCTION  
The extensive wars wherewith Louis XIV was burdened during his 
reign, while draining the State’s treasury and exhausting the substance of the people, none the less contained the secret that led to the prosperity 
of a swarm of those bloodsuckers who are always on the watch for public 
calamities, which, instead of appeasing, they promote or invent so as, 
precisely, to be able to profit from them  the more advantageously. The 
end of this so very sublime reign was perhaps one of the periods in the history of the French Empire when one saw the emergence of the greatest number of these mysterious fortunes whose origins are as 
obscure as the lust and debauchery that accompany them. It was toward 
the close of this period, and not long before the Regent sought, by 
means of the famous tribunal which goes under the name of the 
Chambre de Justice,  to flush this multitude of traffickers, that four of 
them con ceived the idea for the singular revels whereof we are going to 
give an account. One must not suppose that it was exclusively the lowborn and vulgar sort which did this swindling; gentlemen of the 
highest note led the pack. The Duc de Blangis and his broth er the 
Bishop of X***, each of whom had thuswise amassed immense fortunes, 
are in themselves solid proof that, like the others, the nobility neglected 
no opportunities to take this road to wealth. These two illustrious 
figures, through their pleasures and business closely associated with the 
celebrated Durcet and the Président de Curval, were the first to hit upon the debauch we propose to chronicle, and having communicated the 
scheme to their two friends, all four agreed to assume the major roles in 
these unusual orgies.  For above six years these four libertines, kindred through their wealth 
and tastes, had thought to strengthen their ties by means of alliances in 
which debauchery had by far a heavier part than any of the other motives 
that ordinarily serve  as a basis for such bonds. What they arranged was 
as follows: the Duc de Blangis, thrice a widower and sire of two 
daughters one wife had given him, having noticed that the Président de 
Curval appeared interested in marrying the elder of these girls, desp ite 
the familiarities he knew perfectly well her father had indulged in with 
her, the Duc, I say, suddenly conceived the idea of a triple alliance.  
“You want Julie for your wife,” said he to Curval, “I give her to you 
unhesitatingly and put but one condition to the match: that you’ll not be 
jealous when, although your wife, she continues to show me the same 
complaisance she always has in the past; what is more, I’d have you lend your voice to mine in persuading our good Durcet to give me his 
daughter Consta nce, for whom, I must confess, I have developed 
roughly the same feelings you have formed for Julie.”  
“But,” said Curval, “you are surely aware that Durcet, just as libertine 
as you …” 
“I know all that’s to be known,” the Duc rejoined. “In this age, and 
with our manner of thinking, is one halted by such things? do you think 
I seek a wife in order to have a mistress? I want a wife that my whims 
may be served, I want her to veil, to cover an infinite number of little 
secret debauches the cloak of marriage wond erfully conceals. In a word, I 
want her for the reasons you want my daughter —do you fancy I am 
ignorant of your object and desires? We libertines wed women to hold 
slaves; as wives they are rendered more submissive than mistresses, and 
you know the value w e set upon despotism in the joys we pursue.”  It was at this point Durcet entered. His two friends related their 
conversation and, delighted by an overture which promptly induced him 
to avow the sentiments he too had conceived for Adelaide, the 
Président’s daughter, Durcet accepted the Du c as his son- in-law, 
provided he might become Curval’s. The three marriages were speedily 
concluded, the dowries were immense, the wedding contracts identical.  
No less culpable than his two colleagues, the Président had admi tted 
to Durcet, who betrayed no displeasure upon learning it, that he 
maintained a little clandestine commerce with his own daughter; the 
three fathers, each wishing not only to preserve his rights, but noticing here the possibility of extending them, comm only agreed that the three 
young ladies, bound to their husbands by goods and homes only, would not in body belong more to one than to any of them, and the severest punishments were prescribed for her who should take it into her head 
not to comply with any  of the conditions whereunto she was subject.  
They were on the eve of realizing their plan when the Bishop of X***, 
already closebound through pleasure shared with his brother’s two friends, proposed contributing a fourth element to the alliance should 
the other three gentlemen consent to his participation in the affair. This 
element, the Duc’s second daughter and hence the Bishop’s niece, was 
already more thoroughly his property than was generally imagined. He 
had effected connections with his sister -in-law and the two brothers 
knew beyond all shadow of doubt that the existence of this maiden, who 
was called Aline, was far more accurately to be ascribed to the Bishop 
than to the Duc; the former who, from the time she left the cradle, had 
taken the girl into his keeping, had not, as one may well suppose, stood 
idle as the years brought her charms to flower. And so, upon this head, 
he was his colleagues’ equal, and the article he offered to put on the market was in an equal degree damaged or degraded; but as A line’s 
attractions and tender youth outshone even those of her three 
companions, she was unhesitatingly made a part of the bargain. As had 
the other three, the Bishop yielded her up, but retained the rights to her use; and so each of our four characters th us found himself husband to 
four wives. Thus there resulted an arrangement which, for the reader’s convenience, we shall recapitulate:  
The Duc, Julie’s father, became the husband of Constance, Durcet’s 
daughter;  
Durcet, Constance’s father, became the husband of Adelaide, the 
Président’s daughter;  
The Président, Adelaide’s father, became the husband of Julie, the 
Duc’s elder daughter;  
And the Bishop, Aline’s uncle and father, became the husband of the 
other three females by ceding this same Aline to his frie nds, the while 
retaining the same rights over her.  
It was at a superb estate of the Duc, situated in the Bourbonnais, that 
these happy matches were made, and I leave to the reader to fancy how 
they were consummated and in what orgies; obliged as we are to describe 
others, we shall forego the pleasure of picturing these.  
Upon their return to Paris, our four friends’ association became only 
the firmer; and as our next task is to make the reader familiar with them, 
before proceeding to individual and more sear ching developments, a few 
details of their lubricious arrangements will serve, it seems to me, to shed a preliminary light upon the character of these debauchees.  
The society had created a common fund, which each of its members 
took his turn administering for six months; the sums, allocated for nothing but expenses in the interests of pleasure, were vast. Their excessive wealth put the most unusual things within their reach, and the 
reader ought not be surprised to hear that two million were annually 
disbur sed to obtain good cheer and lust’s satisfaction.  
Four accomplished procuresses to recruit women, and a similar 
number of pimps to scout out men, had the sole duty to range both the 
capital and the provinces and bring back everything, in the one gender 
and in the other, that could best satisfy their sensuality’s demands. Four 
supper parties were held regularly every week in four different country 
houses located at four different extremities of Paris. At the first of these 
gatherings, the one exclusively giv en over to the pleasures of sodomy, 
only men were present; there would always be at hand sixteen young 
men, ranging in age from twenty to thirty, whose immense faculties 
permitted our four heroes, in feminine guise, to taste the most agreeable delights. Th e youths were selected solely upon the basis of the size of 
their member, and it almost became necessary that this superb limb be of such magnificence that it could never have penetrated any woman; this was an essential clause, and as naught was spared by way of expense, only 
very rarely would it fail to be fulfilled. But simultaneously to sample 
every pleasure, to these sixteen husbands was joined the same quantity of 
boys, much younger, whose purpose was to assume the office of women. 
These lads were from  twelve to eighteen years old, and to be chosen for 
service each had to possess a freshness, a face, graces, charms, an air, an 
innocence, a candor which are far beyond what our brush could possibly 
paint. No woman was admitted to these masculine orgies, in the course 
of which everything of the lewdest invented in Sodom and Gomorrah 
was executed.  
At the second supper were girls of superior class who, upon these 
occasions forced to give up their proud ostentation and the customary insolence of their bearing,  were constrained, in return for their hire, to 
abandon themselves to the most irregular caprices, and often even to the 
outrages our libertines were pleased to inflict upon them. Twelve of 
these girls would appear, and as Paris could not have furnished a fresh supply of them as often as would have been necessary, these evenings 
were interspersed with others at which were admitted, only in the same 
number as the well -bred ladies, women ranging from procuresses up 
through the class of officers’ wives. There are above four or five thousand 
women in Paris who belong to one or the other of the two latter classes 
and whom need or lust obliges to attend soirees of this kind; one has but to have good agents to find them, and our libertines, who were 
splendidly repr esented, would frequently come across miraculous 
specimens. But it was in vain one was honest or a decent woman, one 
had to submit to everything: our Lordships’ libertinage, of a variety that 
never brooks limits, would overwhelm with horrors and infamies 
whatever, whether by Nature or social convention, ought to have been 
exempt from such ordeals. Once one was there, one had to be ready for 
anything, and as our four villains had every taste that accompanies the 
lowest, most crapulous debauch, this fundament al acquiescence to their 
desires was not by any means a matter of inconsequence.  
The guests at the third supper were the vilest, foulest creatures that 
can possibly be met with. To him who has some acquaintance with 
debauchery’s extravagances, this refinem ent will appear wholly 
understandable; ’tis most voluptuous to wallow, so to speak, in filth with 
persons of this category; these exercises offer the completest abandon, 
the most monstrous intemperance, the most total abasement, and these 
pleasures, compar ed with those tasted the evening before, or with the 
distinguished individuals in whose company we have tasted them, have a way of lending a sharp spice to earlier activities. At these third suppers, 
debauch being more thorough, nothing was omitted that might render it 
complex and piquant. A hundred whores would appear in the course of 
six hours, and only too often something less than the full hundred would leave the games. But there is nothing to be gained by hurrying our story 
or by broaching subjects which can only receive adequate treatment in 
the sequel.  
As for the fourth supper, it was reserved for young maids; only those 
between the ages of seven and fifteen were permitted. Their condition in life was of no importance, what counted was their looks: th ey had to be 
charming; as for their virginity, authentic evidence was required. Oh, 
incredible refinement of libertinage! It was not, assuredly, that they 
wished to pluck all those roses, and how indeed could they have done so? for those untouched flowers were always a score in number, and of our 
four libertines only two were capable of proceeding to the act, one of the 
remaining two, the financier, being absolutely incapable of an erection, and the Bishop being absolutely unable to take his pleasure save i n a 
fashion which, yes, I agree, may dishonor a virgin but which, however, 
always leaves her perfectly intact. No matter; the twenty maidenheads 
had to be there, and those which were not impaired by our quartet of 
masters became, before their eyes, the prey of certain of their valets just 
as depraved as they, whom they kept constantly at beck and call for more than one reason.  
Apart from these four supper parties there was another, a secret and 
private one held every Friday, involving many fewer persons but  surely 
costing a great deal more. The participants were restricted to four young 
and high -born damsels who, by means of strategy and money, had been 
abducted from their parents’ homes. Our libertines’ wives nearly always had a share in this debauch, and t heir extreme submissiveness, their 
docile attentions, their services made it more of a success each time. As 
for the genial atmosphere at these suppers, it goes without saying that 
even greater profusion than delicacy reigned there; not one of these meals cost less than ten thousand francs, and neighboring countries as 
well as all France were ransacked so that what was of the rarest and most exquisite might be assembled together. Fine and abundant wines and liqueurs were there, and even during the winter th ey had fruits of every 
season; in a word, one may be certain that the table of the world’s greatest monarch was not dressed with as much luxury nor served with equal magnificence.  
But now let us retrace our steps and do our best to portray one by one 
each of our four heroes —to describe each not in terms of the beautiful, 
not in a manner that would seduce or captivate the reader, but simply 
with the brush strokes of Nature which, despite all her disorder, is often 
sublime, indeed even when she is at her most  depraved. For —and why 
not say so in passing —if crime lacks the kind of delicacy one finds in 
virtue, is not the former always more sublime, does it not unfailingly 
have a character of grandeur and sublimity which surpasses, and will 
always make it preferable to, the monotonous and lackluster charms of 
virtue? Will you protest the greater usefulness of this or of that, is it for 
us to scan Nature’s laws, ours to determine whether, vice being just as necessary to Nature as is virtue, she perhaps does not imp lant in us, in 
equal quantity, the penchant for one or the other, depending upon her respective needs? But let us proceed.  
The Duc de Blangis,  at eighteen the master of an already colossal 
fortune which his later speculations much increased, experienced al l the 
difficulties which descend like a cloud of locusts upon a rich and influential young man who need not deny himself anything; it almost 
always happens in such cases that the extent of one’s assets turns into 
that of one’s vices, and one stints oneself that much less the more one 
has the means to procure oneself everything. Had the Duc received a few 
elementary qualities from Nature, they might possibly have 
counterbalanced the dangers which beset him in his position, but this 
curious mother, who sometimes seems to collaborate with chance in order that the latter may favor every vice she gives to those certain beings 
of whom she expects attentions very different from those virtue 
supposes, and this because she has just as much need of the one as of the other, Nature, I say, in destining Blangis for immense wealth, had 
meticulously endowed him with every impulse, every inspiration required for its abuse. Together with a tenebrous and very evil mind, she had accorded him a heart of flint and an utterly crim inal soul, and these were 
accompanied by the disorders in tastes and irregularity of whim whence were born the dreadful libertinage to which the Duc was in no common measure addicted. Born treacherous, harsh, imperious, barbaric, selfish, 
as lavish in the pursuit of pleasure as miserly when it were a question of 
useful spending, a liar, a gourmand, a drunk, a dastard, a sodomite, fond 
of incest, given to murdering, to arson, to theft, no, not a single virtue 
compensated that host of vices. Why, what am I sa ying! not only did he 
never so much as dream of a single virtue, he beheld them all with 
horror, and he was frequently heard to say that to be truly happy in this 
world a man ought not merely fling himself into every vice, but should 
never permit himself o ne virtue, and that it was not simply a matter of 
always doing evil, but also and above all of never doing good.  
“Oh, there are plenty of people,” the Duc used to observe, “who never 
misbehave save when passion spurs them to ill; later, the fire gone out of them, their now calm spirit peacefully returns to the path of virtue and, 
thus passing their life going from strife to error and from error to 
remorse, they end their days in such a way there is no telling just what 
roles they have enacted on earth. Such  persons,” he would continue, 
“must surely be miserable: forever drifting, continually undecided, their 
entire life is spent detesting in the morning what they did the evening 
before. Certain to repent of the pleasures they taste, they take their delight i n quaking, in such sort they become at once virtuous in crime 
and criminal in virtue. However,” our hero would add, “my more solid character is a stranger to these contradictions; I do my choosing without hesitation, and as I am always sure to find pleasur e in the choice I make, 
never does regret arise to dull its charm. Firm in my principles because those I formed are sound and were formed very early, I always act in accordance with them; they have made me understand the emptiness 
and nullity of virtue; I hate virtue, and never will I be seen resorting to it. 
They have persuaded me that through vice alone is man capable of 
experiencing this moral and physical vibration which is the source of the 
most delicious voluptuousness; so I give myself over to vice. I was still 
very young when I learned to hold religion’s fantasies in contempt, being 
perfectly convinced that the existence of a creator is a revolting absurdity 
in which not even children continue to believe. I have no need to thwart 
my inclinations in order to flatter some god; these instincts were given me by Nature, and it would be to irritate her were I to resist them; if she 
gave me bad ones, that is because they were necessary to her designs. I 
am in her hands but a machine which she runs as she lik es, and not one 
of my crimes does not serve her: the more she urges me to commit them, 
the more of them she needs; I should be a fool to disobey her. Thus, 
nothing but the law stands in my way, but I defy the law, my gold and my prestige keep me well beyon d reach of those vulgar instruments of 
repression which should be employed only upon the common sort.”  
If one were to raise the objection that, nevertheless, all men possess 
ideas of the just and the unjust which can only be the product of Nature, 
since th ese notions are found in every people and even amongst the 
uncivilized, the Duc would reply affirmatively, saying that yes, those ideas have never been anything if not relative, that the stronger has always considered exceedingly just what the weaker regar ded as 
flagrantly unjust, and that it takes no more than the mere reversal of their positions for each to be able to change his way of thinking too; whence the Duc would conclude that nothing is really just but what 
makes for pleasure, and what is unjust i s the cause of pain; that in taking 
a hundred louis  from a man’s pocket, he was doing something very just 
for himself, although the victim of the robbery might have to regard the 
action with another eye; that all these notions therefore being very 
arbitrar y, a fool he who would allow himself to become their thrall. It 
was by means of arguments in this kind the Duc used to justify his 
transgressions, and as he was a man of greatest possible wit, his 
arguments had a decisive ring. And so, modeling his conduct  upon his 
philosophy, the Duc had, from his most tender youth, abandoned 
himself unrestrainedly to the most shameful extravagances, and to the 
most extraordinary ones. His father, having died young and, as I indicated, left him in control of a huge fortune , had however stipulated 
in his will that the young man’s mother should, while she lived, be allowed to enjoy a large share of this legacy. Such a condition was not 
long in displeasing Blangis: poison appearing to be the only way to avoid 
having to subscribe to this article, the knave straightway decided to make 
use of it. But this was the period when he was only making his first steps in a vicious career; not daring to act himself, he brought one of his 
sisters, with whom he was carrying on a criminal intr igue, to take charge 
of the execution, assuring her that if she were to succeed, he would see to it that she would be the beneficiary of that part of the fortune whereof death would deprive their mother. However, the young lady was 
horrified by this propos al, and the Duc, observing that this ill- confided 
secret was perhaps going to betray him, decided on the spot to extend 
his plans to include the sister he had hoped to have for an accomplice; he 
conducted both women to one of his properties whence the two 
unfortunate ones never returned. Nothing quite encourages as does one’s first unpunished crime. This hurdle once cleared, an open field seemed 
to beckon to the Duc. Immediately any person whomsoever showed 
opposition to his desires, poison was employed for thwith. From 
necessary murders he soon passed to those of pure pleasure; he was 
captivated by that regrettable folly which causes us to find delight in the 
sufferings of others; he noticed that a violent commotion inflicted upon any kind of an adversary is  answered by a vibrant thrill in our own 
nervous system; the effect of this vibration, arousing the animal spirits 
which flow within these nerves’ concavities, obliges them to exert 
pressure on the erector nerves and to produce in accordance with this 
perturbation what is termed a lubricious sensation. Consequently, he set 
about committing thefts and murders in the name of debauchery and 
libertinage, just as someone else would be content, in order to inflame 
these same passions, to chase a whore or two. At the age of twenty -
three, he and three of his companions in vice, whom he had 
indoctrinated with his philosophy, made up a party whose aim was to go 
out and stop a public coach on the highway, to rape the men among the 
travelers along with the women, to ass assinate them afterward, to make off with their victims’ money (the conspirators certainly had no need of 
this), and to be back that same night, all three of them, at the Opera Ball 
in order to have a sound alibi. This crime took place, ah, yes: two 
charmi ng maids were violated and massacred in their mother’s arms; to 
this was joined an endless list of other horrors, and no one dared suspect 
the Duc. Weary of the delightful wife his father had bestowed upon him 
before dying, the young Blangis wasted no time  uniting her shade to his 
mother’s, to his sister’s, and to those of all his other victims. Why all 
this? to be able to marry a girl, wealthy, to be sure, but publicly 
dishonored and whom he knew full well was her brother’s mistress. The person in question was the mother of Aline, one of the figures in our 
novel we mentioned above. This second wife, soon sacrificed like the first, gave way to a third, who followed hard on the heels of the second. It was rumored abroad that the Duc’s huge construction was re sponsible 
for the undoing of all his wives, and as this gigantic tale corresponded in every point to its gigantic inspiration, the Duc let the opinion take root and veil the truth. That dreadful colossus did indeed make one think of a 
Hercules or a centaur : Blangis stood five feet eleven inches tall, had 
limbs of great strength and energy, powerful sinews, elastic nerves, in 
addition to that a proud and masculine visage, great dark eyes, handsome black eyelashes, an aquiline nose, fine teeth, a quality of h ealth and 
exuberance, broad shoulders, a heavy chest but a well- proportioned 
figure withal, splendid hips, superb buttocks, the handsomest leg in the world, an iron temperament, the strength of a horse, the member of a 
veritable mule, wondrously hirsute, b lessed with the ability to eject its 
sperm any number of times within a given day and at will, even at the 
age of fifty, which was his age at the time, a virtually constant erection in 
this member whose dimensions were an exact eight inches for circumferen ce and twelve for length over -all, and there you have the 
portrait of the Duc de Blangis, drawn as accurately as if you’d wielded 
the pencil yourself. But if this masterpiece of Nature was violent in its 
desires, what was it like, Great God! when crowned b y drunken 
voluptuousness? ’Twas  a man no longer, ’twas  a raging tiger. Woe unto 
him who happened then to be serving its passions; frightful cries, atrocious blasphemies sprang from the Duc ’s swollen breast, flames 
seemed to dart from his eyes, he foamed at  the mouth, he whinnied like 
a stallion, you’d have taken him for the very god of lust. Whatever then was his manner of having his pleasure, his hands necessarily strayed, roamed continually, and he had been more than once seen to strangle a 
woman to death  at the instant of his perfidious discharge. His presence 
of mind once restored, his frenzy was immediately replaced by the most 
complete indifference to the infamies wherewith he had just indulged 
himself, and of this indifference, of this kind of apathy,  further sparks of 
lechery would be born almost at once.  
In his youth, the Duc had been known to discharge as often as 
eighteen times a day, and that without appearing one jot more fatigued 
after the final than after the initial ejaculation. Seven or eight  crises 
within the same interval still held no terrors for him, his half a century of 
years notwithstanding. For roughly twenty -five years he had accustomed 
himself to passive sodomy, and he withstood its assaults with the 
identical vigor that characterize d his manner of delivering them actively 
when, the very next moment, it pleased him to exchange roles. He had once wagered he could sustain fifty -five attacks in a day, and so he had. 
Furnished, as we have pointed out, with prodigious strength, he needed 
only one hand to violate a girl, and he had proved it upon several 
occasions. One day he boasted he could squeeze the life out of a horse with his legs; he mounted the beast, it collapsed at the instant he had 
predicted. His prowess at the table outshone, if that is possible, what he 
demonstrated upon the bed. There’s no imagining what had come to be 
the quantity of the food he consumed. He regularly ate three meals a day, and they were all three exceedingly prolonged and exceedingly 
copious, and it was as nothing to him to toss down his usual ten bottles 
of Burgundy; he had drunk up to thirty, and needed but to be challenged and he would set out for the mark of fifty; but his intoxication taking on 
the tinge of his passions, and liqueurs or wines having heat ed his brain, 
he would wax furious, and they would be obliged to tie him down. And 
despite all that, would you believe it? a steadfast child might have hurled 
this giant into a panic; true indeed it is that the spirit often poorly 
corresponds with the fles hly sheath enveloping it: as soon as Blangis 
discovered he could no longer use his treachery or his deceit to make 
away with his enemy, he would become timid and cowardly, and the 
mere thought of even the mildest combat, but fought on equal terms, would ha ve sent him fleeing to the ends of the earth. He had 
nevertheless, in keeping with custom, been in one or two campaigns, but 
had acquitted himself so disgracefully he had retired from the service at 
once. Justifying his turpitude with equal amounts of clev erness and 
effrontery, he loudly proclaimed that his poltroonery being nothing 
other than the desire to preserve himself, it were perfectly impossible for anyone in his right senses to condemn it for a fault.  
Keep in mind the identical moral traits; next, adapt them to an entity 
from the physical point of view infinitely inferior to the one we have just described; there you have the portrait of the Bishop of X***,  the Duc de 
Blangis’ brother. The same black soul, the same penchant for crime, the same contempt for religion, the same atheism, the same deception and cunning, a yet more supple and adroit mind, however, and more art in 
guiding his victims to their doom, but a slender figure, not heavy, no, a 
little thin body, wavering health, very delicate nerves , a greater 
fastidiousness in the pursuit of pleasure, mediocre prowess, a most 
ordinary member, even small, but deft, profoundly skilled in 
management, each time yielding so little that his incessantly inflamed 
imagination would render him capable of tast ing delight quite as 
frequently as his brother; his sensations were of a remarkable acuteness, 
he would experience an irritation so prodigious he would often fall into a 
deep swoon upon discharging, and he almost always temporarily lost consciousness when doing so.  
He was forty -five, had delicate features, rather attractive eyes but a 
foul mouth and ugly teeth, a hairless pallid body, a small but well -shaped 
ass, and a prick five inches around and six in length. An idolater of active 
and passive sodomy, but  eminently of the latter, he spent his life having 
himself buggered, and this pleasure, which never requires much expense 
of energy, was best suited to the modesty of his means. We will speak of 
his other tastes in good time. With what regards those of the  table, he 
carried them nearly as far as the Duc, but went about the matter with 
somewhat more sensuality. Monseigneur, no less a criminal than his elder brother, possessed characteristics which had doubtless permitted 
him to match the celebrated feats of the hero we painted a moment ago; we will content ourselves with citing one of them, ’twill  be enough to 
make the reader see of what such a man may be capable, and what he was prepared and disposed to do, having done the following:  
One of his friends, a ma n powerful and rich, had formerly had an 
intrigue with a young noblewoman who had borne him two children, a girl and a boy. He had, however, never been able to wed her, and the maiden had become another’s wife. The unlucky girl’s lover died while 
still you ng, but the owner howbeit of a tremendous fortune; having no 
kin to provide for, it occurred to him to bequeath all he had to the two ill-fated children his affair had produced.  
On his deathbed, he made the Bishop privy to his intentions and 
entrusted him with these two immense endowments: he divided the sum, put them in two purses, and gave them to the Bishop, confiding the two orphans’ education to this man of God and enlisting him to pass 
on to each what was to be his when they attained their majority. At the 
same time he enjoined the prelate to invest his wards’ funds, so that in the meantime they would double in size. He also affirmed that it was his 
design to leave his offsprings’ mother in eternal ignorance of what he 
was doing for them, and he absolutely insisted that none of this should ever be mentioned to her. These arrangements concluded, the dying man 
closed his eyes, and Monseigneur found himself master of about a 
million in banknotes, and of two children. The scoundrel was not long deliberating  his next step: the dying man had spoken to no one but him, 
the mother was to know nothing, the children were only four or five 
years old. He circulated the intelligence that his friend, upon expiring, 
had left his fortune to the poor; the rascal acquired it the same day. But 
to ruin those wretched children did not suffice; furnished with authority 
by their father, the Bishop —who never committed one crime without 
instantly conceiving another —had the children removed from the 
remote pension in which they wer e being brought up, and placed them 
under the roof of certain people in his hire, from the outset having 
resolved soon to make them serve his perfidious lust. He waited until 
they were thirteen; the little boy was the first to arrive at that age: the 
Bishop put him to use, bent him to all his debauches, and as he was extremely pretty, sported with him for a week. But the little girl fared 
less well: she reached the prescribed age, but was very ugly, a fact which 
had no mitigating effect upon the good Bishop ’s lubricious fury. His 
desires appeased, he feared lest these children, left alive, would someday 
discover something of the secret of their interests. Therefore, he 
conducted them to an estate belonging to his brother and, sure of 
recapturing, by means of a new crime, the sparks of lechery enjoyment 
had just caused him to lose, he immolated both of them to his ferocious 
passions, and accompanied their death with episodes so piquant and so 
cruel that his voluptuousness was reborn in the midst of the torment s 
wherewith he beset them. The thing is, unhappily, only too well known: 
there is no libertine at least a little steeped in vice who is not aware of 
the great sway murder exerts over the senses, and how voluptuously it determines a discharge. And that is a general truth whereof it were well 
the reader be early advised before undertaking the perusal of a work which will surely attempt an ample development of this system.  
Henceforth at ease in the face of whatever might transpire, 
Monseigneur returned to Pari s to enjoy the fruit of his misdeeds, and 
without the least qualms about having counteracted the intentions of a 
man who, in his present situation, was in no state to derive either pain or 
pleasure therefrom.  
The Président de Curval  was a pillar of society ; almost sixty years of 
age, and worn by debauchery to a singular degree, he offered the eye not much more than a skeleton. He was tall, he was dry, thin, had two blue 
lusterless eyes, a livid and unwholesome mouth, a prominent chin, a long 
nose. Hairy as a satyr, flat -backed, with slack, drooping buttocks that 
rather resembled a pair of dirty rags flapping upon his upper thighs; the skin of those buttocks was, thanks to whipstrokes, so deadened and toughened that you could seize up a handful and knead it w ithout his 
feeling a thing. In the center of it all there was displayed —no need to 
spread those cheeks —an immense orifice whose enormous diameter, 
odor, and color bore a closer resemblance to the depths of a well -
freighted privy than to an asshole; and, cr owning touch to these 
allurements, there was numbered among this sodomizing pig’s little 
idiosyncrasies that of always leaving this particular part of himself in such a state of uncleanliness that one was at all times able to observe 
there a rim or pad a g ood two inches thick. Below a belly as wrinkled as 
it was livid and gummy, one perceived, within a forest of hairs, a tool 
which, in its erectile condition, might have been about eight inches long 
and seven around; but this condition had come to be most ra re and to 
procure it a furious sequence of things was the necessary preliminary. 
Nevertheless, the event occurred at least two or three times each week, 
and upon these occasions the Président would glide into every hole to be 
found, indiscriminately, although that of a young lad’s behind was infinitely the most precious to him. The head of the Président’s device 
was now at all times exposed, for he had had himself circumcised, a 
ceremony which largely facilitates enjoyment and to which all pleasure -
loving p ersons ought to submit. But one of the purposes of the same 
operation is to keep this privity cleaner; nothing of the sort in Curval’s 
case: this part of him was just as filthy as the other: this uncapped head, naturally quite thick to begin with, was thus  made at least an inch 
ampler in circumference. Similarly untidy about all the rest of his person, the Président, who furthermore had tastes at the very least as nasty as his 
appearance, had become a figure whose rather malodorous vicinity might 
not have s ucceeded in pleasing everyone. However, his colleagues were 
not at all of the sort to be scandalized by such trifles, and they simply avoided discussing the matter with him. Few mortals had been as free in 
their behavior or as debauched as the Président; but, entirely jaded, 
absolutely besotted, all that remained to him was the depravation and 
lewd profligacy of libertinage. Above three hours of excess, and of the most outrageous excess, were needed before one could hope to inspire a 
voluptuous reaction in him. As for his emission, although in Curval the 
phenomenon was far more frequent than erection, and could be observed once every day, it was, all the same, so difficult to obtain, or it never 
occurred save as an aftermath to things so strange and often so  cruel or 
so unclean, that the agents of his pleasures not uncommonly renounced 
the struggle, fainting by the wayside, the which would give birth in him 
to a kind of lubricious anger and this, through its effects, would now and 
again triumph where his efforts had failed. Curval was to such a point mired down in the morass of vice and libertinage that it had become 
virtually impossible for him to think or speak of anything else. He 
unendingly had the most appalling expressions in his mouth, just as he had th e vilest designs in his heart, and these with surpassing energy he 
mingled with blasphemies and imprecations supplied him by his true 
horror, a sentiment he shared with his companions, for everything that 
smacked of religion. This disorder of mind, yet fur ther augmented by 
the almost continual intoxication in which he was fond of keeping 
himself, had during the past few years given him an air of imbecility and prostration which, he would declare, made for his most cherished 
delight.  
Born as great a gourmand  as a drunk, he alone was fit to keep abreast 
of the Duc, and in the course of this tale we will behold him to perform wonders which will no doubt astonish the most veteran eaters.  It had been ten years since Curval had ceased to discharge his judicial 
duties; it was not simply that he was no longer fit to carry them out, but 
I even believe that while he had been, he may have been asked to leave 
these matters alone for the rest of his life.  
Curval had led a very libertine life, every sort of perversion was 
familiar to him, and those who knew him personally had the strong suspicion he owed his vast fortune to nothing other than two or three execrable murders. However that may be, it is, in the light of the 
following story, highly probable that this variety of  extravagance had the 
power to stir him deeply, and it is this adventure, which attracted some 
unfortunate publicity, that was responsible for his exclusion from the 
Court. We are going to relate the episode in order to give the reader an 
idea of his character.  
There dwelled in the neighborhood of Curval’s town house a 
miserable street porter who, the father of a charming little girl, was ridiculous enough to be a person of sensibility. Twenty messages of every kind had already arrived containing proposals relating to the poor 
fellow’s daughter; he and his wife had remained unshaken despite this 
barrage aimed at their corruption, and Curval, the source of these 
embassies, only irritated by the growing number of refusals they had 
evoked, knew not what tack to take in order to get his hands upon the 
girl and to subject her to his libidinous caprices, until it struck him that 
by simply having the father broken he would lead the daughter to his bed. The thing was as nicely conceived as executed. Two or three bull ies 
in the Pr ésident’s pay intervened in the suit, and before the month was 
out, the wretched porter was enmeshed in an imaginary crime which seemed to have been committed at his door and which got him speedily 
lodged in one of the Conciergerie’s dungeons.  The Président, as one would expect, soon took charge of the case, and, having no desire to 
permit it to drag on, arranged in the space of three days, thanks to his 
knavery and his gold, to have the unlucky porter condemned to be 
broken on the wheel, without the culprit ever having committed any crime but that of wishing to preserve his honor and safeguard his 
daughter’s.  
Meanwhile, the solicitations were renewed. The mother was brought 
in, it was explained to her that she alone had it in her power to save her 
husband, that if she were to satisfy the Président, what could be clearer 
than that he would thereupon snatch her husband from the dreadful fate awaiting him. Further hesitation was impossible; the woman made 
inquiries; Curval knew perfectly well to wh om she addressed herself, the 
counsels were his creatures, and they gave her unambiguous replies: she 
ought not waste a moment. The poor woman herself brought her 
daughter weeping to her judge’s feet; the latter could not have been more 
liberal with his pr omises, nor have been less eager to keep his word. Not 
only did he fear lest, were he to deal honorably and spare the husband, 
the man might go and raise an uproar upon discovering the price that 
had been paid to save his life, but the scoundrel even found  a further 
delight, a yet keener one, in arranging to have himself given what he 
wished without being obliged to make any return.  
This thought led to others; numerous criminal possibilities entered his 
head, and their effect was to increase his perfidious lubricity. And this is how he set about the matter so as to put the maximum of infamy and 
piquancy into the scene:  
His mansion stood facing a spot where criminals are sometimes 
executed in Paris, and as this particular offense had been committed in that qu arter of the city, he won assurance the punishment would be meted out on this particular square. The wretch’s wife and daughter 
arrived at the Président’s home at the appointed hour; all windows 
overlooking the square were well shuttered, so that, from the  apartments 
where he amused himself with his victims, nothing at all could be seen 
of what was going on outside. Apprised of the exact minute of the 
execution, the rascal selected it for the deflowering of the little girl who 
was held in her mother’s arms,  and everything was so happily arranged 
that Curval discharged into the child’s ass the moment her father 
expired. Instantly he’d completed his business, “Come have a look,” 
quoth he, opening a window looking upon the square, “come see how well I’ve kept m y bargain,” and one of his two princesses saw her father, 
the other her husband, delivering up his soul to the headsman’s steel.  
Both collapsed in a faint, but Curval had provided for everything: this 
swoon was their agony, they’d both been poisoned, and nevermore 
opened their eyes. Notwithstanding the precautions he had taken to 
swathe the whole of this exploit in the most profound mystery, something did indeed transpire: nothing was known of the women’s 
death, but there existed a lively suspicion he had been untruthful in 
connection with the husband’s case. His motive was half- known, and his 
eventual retirement from the bench was the outcome. As of this 
moment, no longer having to maintain appearances, Curval flung 
himself into a new ocean of errors and cr imes. He sent everywhere for 
victims to sacrifice to the perversity of his tastes. Through an atrocious 
refinement of cruelty, but one, however, very easily understood, the 
downtrodden classes were those upon which he most enjoyed hurling the 
effects of his raging perfidy. He had several minions who were abroad 
night and day, scouring attics and hovels, tracking down whatever of the 
most destitute misery might be able to provide, and under the pretext of dispensing aid, either he envenomed his catch —to give  poison was one 
of his most delectable pastimes —or he lured it to his house and slew it 
upon the altar of his perverse preferences. Men, women, children: 
anything was fuel to his rage, and at its bidding he performed excesses which would have got his head between block and blade a thousand 
times over were it not for the silver he distributed and the esteem he 
enjoyed, factors whereby he was a thousand times protected. One may well imagine such a being had no more religion than his two confreres; 
he without doubt detested it as sovereignly as they, but in years past had 
done more to wither it in others, for, in the days when his mind had been sound, it had also been clever, and he had put it to good use writing 
against religion; he was the author of several works whose influence had 
been prodigious, and these successes, always present in his memory, still constituted one of his dearest delights.  
The more we multiply the objects of our enjoyments …
1 
(a)  …the years of a sickly childhood.  
(b)  Durcet  is fifty -three; he is small, short, broad, thickset; an 
agreeable, hearty face; a very white skin; his entire body, and principally his hips and buttocks, absolutely like a woman’s; his ass is cool and fresh, chubby, firm, and dimpled, but excessively agape, owing to the habit of 
sodomy; his prick is extraordinarily small, ’tis  scarcely two inches around, 
no more than four inches long; it has entirely ceased to stiffen; his 
discharges are rare and uneasy, far from abundant and always preceded 
1 Place here the portrait of Durcet as it is in notebook 18, the one that’s bound in 
pink, then, aft er having concluded this portrait with the words under (a) in the 
notebooks, continue with (b).                                           by spasms which hurl him i nto a kind of furor which, in turn, conducts 
him to crime; he has a chest like a woman’s, a sweet, pleasant voice and, 
when in society, the best -bred manners, although his mind is without 
question as depraved as his colleagues’; a schoolmate of the Duc, th ey 
still sport together every day, and one of Durcet’s loftiest pleasures is to 
have his anus tickled by the Duc’s enormous member.  
And such, dear reader, are the four villains in whose company I am 
going to have you pass a few months. I have done my best to describe 
them; if, as I have wished, I have made you familiar with even their most 
secret depths, nothing in the tale of their various follies will astonish you. 
I have not been able to enter into minute detail with what regards their 
tastes —to have done so now would have been to impair the value and to 
harm the main scheme of this work. But as we move progressively along, 
you will have but to keep an attentive eye upon our heroes, and you’ll 
have no trouble discerning their characteristic peccadillos an d the 
particular type of voluptuous mania which best suits each of them. 
Roughly all we can say at the present time is that they were generally 
susceptible of an enthusiasm for sodomy, that the four of them had 
themselves buggered regularly, and that they all four worshiped behinds.  
The Duc, however, relative to the immensity of his weapon and, 
doubtless, more through cruelty than from taste, still fucked cunts with 
the greatest pleasure.  
So also did the Président, but less frequently.  
As for the Bishop, su ch was his supreme loathing for them the mere 
sight of one might have kept him limp for six months. He had never in all his life fucked but one, that belonging to his sister -in-law, and 
expressly to beget a child wherewith some day to procure himself the pleasures of incest; we have seen how well he succeeded.  As regards Durcet, he certainly idolized the ass with as much fervor as 
the Bishop, but his enjoyment of it was more accessory; his favorite 
attacks were directed toward a third sanctuary—this mystery  will be 
unveiled in the sequel. But on with the portraits essential to the 
intelligence of this work, and let us now give our reader an idea of these 
worthy husbands’ four wives.  
What a contrast ! Constance,  the Duc’s wife and the daughter of 
Durcet, was a  tall woman, slender, lovely as a picture, and modeled as if 
the Graces had taken pleasure in embellishing her, but the elegance of 
her figure in no way detracted from her freshness, she was not for that 
the less plumply fleshed, and the most delicious for ms graced by a skin 
fairer than the lily, often induced one to suppose that, no, it had been 
Love itself who had undertaken her formation. Her face was a trifle long, her features wonderfully noble, more majesty than gentleness was 
in her look, more grande ur than subtlety. Her eyes were large, black, and 
full of fire; her mouth extremely small and ornamented by the finest 
teeth imaginable, she had a narrow, supple tongue, of the loveliest pink, 
and her breath was sweeter still than the scent of a rose. She was full -
breasted, her bosom was most buxom, fair as alabaster and as firm. Her 
back was turned in an extraordinary way, its lines sweeping deliciously 
down to the most artistically and the most precisely cleft ass Nature has 
produced in a long time. Nothing could have been more perfectly round, 
not very large, but firm, white, dimpled; and when it was opened, what 
used to peep out but the cleanest, most winsome, most delicate hole. A 
nuance of tenderest pink had shaded this ass, charming asylum of 
lubricit y’s sweetest pleasures, but, great God! it was not for long to 
preserve so many charms! Four or five attacks, and the Duc had spoiled all those graces, how quickly had they gone, and soon after her marriage Constance was become no more than the image of a beautiful lily 
wherefrom the tempest has of late stripped the petals away. Two round 
and perfectly molded thighs supported another temple, in all likelihood 
less delicious, but, to him inclined to worship there, offering so many allurements it would be in vain were my pen to strive to describe them. 
Constance was almost a virgin when the Duc married her, and her 
father, the only man who had known her, had, as they say, left that side of her perfectly intact. The most beautiful black hair —falling in natural 
curls to below her shoulders and, when one wished it thus, reaching down to the pretty fur, of the same color, which shaded that voluptuous little cunt —made for a further adornment I might have been guilty of 
omitting, and lent this angelic creature, aged about twenty -two, all the 
charms Nature is able to lavish upon a woman. To all these amenities Constance joined a fair and agreeable wit, a spirit somewhat more 
elevated than it ought to have been, considering the melancholy 
situation fate had awarded her,  for thereby she was enabled to sense all 
its horror and, doubtless, she would have been happier if furnished with 
less delicate perceptions.  
Durcet, who had raised her more as if she were a courtesan than his 
daughter, and who had been much more concerned to give her talents 
than manners, had all the same never been able totally to destroy the 
principles of rectitude and of virtue it seemed Nature had been pleased to engrave in her heart. She had no formal religion, no one had ever 
mentioned such a thing t o her, the exercise of a belief was not to be 
tolerated in her father’s household, but all that had not blotted out this 
modesty, this natural humility which has nothing to do with theological 
chimeras, and which, when it dwells in an upright, decent, and sensitive 
soul, is very difficult to obliterate. Never had she stepped out of her father’s house, and the scoundrel had forced her, beginning at the age of 
twelve, to serve his crapulous pleasures. She found a world of difference 
in those the Duc imbibed with her, her body was noticeably altered by 
those formidable dimensions, and the day after the Duc had despoiled her of her maidenhead, sodomistically speaking, she had fallen 
dangerously ill. They believed her rectum had been irreparably damaged; 
but her youth, her health, and some salutary local remedies soon restored the use of that forbidden avenue to the Duc, and the luckless Constance, 
forced to accustom herself to this daily torture, and it was but one 
amongst others, entirely recovered and became adjusted to everything.  
Adelaide,  Durcet’s wife and the daughter of the Président, had a 
beauty which was perhaps superior to Constance’s, but of an entirely different sort. She was twenty, small and slender, of an extremely slight and delicate build, of classic loveliness, had the finest blond hair to be 
seen. An interesting air, a look of sensibility distributed everywhere 
about her, and above all in her features, gave her the quality of a heroine in a romance. Her exceptionally large eyes were blue, they e xpressed at 
once tenderness and decency; two long but narrow and remarkably 
drawn eyebrows adorned a forehead not very high but of such noble charm one might have thought this were modesty’s very temple. Her 
nose, thin, a little pinched at the top, descend ed to assume a semi -
aquiline contour; her lips inclined toward the thin, were of a bright, ripe 
red; a little large, her mouth was the unique flaw in this celestial 
physiognomy, but when it opened, there shone thirty -two pearls Nature 
seemed to have sown a midst roses. Her neck was a shade long, attached 
in a singular way and, through what one judged a natural habit, her head was ever so faintly bent toward her right shoulder, especially when she 
was listening; but with what grace did not this interesting at titude endow her! Her breasts were small, very round, very firm, well -elevated, 
but there was barely enough there to fill the hand. They were like two 
little apples a frolicking Cupid had fetched hither from his mother’s 
garden. Her chest was a bit narrow,  it was also a very delicate chest, her 
belly was satin smooth, a little blond mound not much garnished with 
hair served as peristyle to the temple in which Venus seemed to call out 
for an homage. This temple was narrow to such a point you could not insert  a finger therein without eliciting a cry from Adelaide; nevertheless, 
two lustrums had revolved since the time when, thanks to the Président, the poor child had ceased to be a virgin, either in that place or in the delicious part it remains for us to sket ch. Oh, what were the attractions 
this second sanctuary possessed, what a flow in the line of her back, how magnificently were those buttocks cut, what whiteness there, and what dazzling rose blush! But all in all, it was on the small side. Delicate in all  
her lines, she was rather the sketch than the model of beauty, it seemed as though Nature had only wished to indicate in Adelaide what she had so majestically articulated in Constance. Peer into that appetizing 
behind, and lo! a rosebud would offer itself  to your gaze, and it was in all 
its bloom and in the most tender pink Nature wished you to behold it; 
but narrow? tiny? it had only been at the price of infinite labors the Président had navigated through those straits, and he had only renewed 
these assau lts successfully two or three times.  
Durcet, less exacting, gave her little affliction in this point, but, since 
becoming his wife, in exchange for how many other cruel complaisances, with what a quantity of other perilous submissions had she not been 
obliged to purchase this little kindness? And, furthermore, turned over 
to the four libertines, as by their mutual consent she was, how many other cruel ordeals had she not to undergo, both of the species Durcet 
spared her, and of every other.  
Adelaide had the  mind her face suggested, that is to say, an extremely 
romantic mind, solitary places were the ones she preferred, and once there, she would shed involuntary tears —tears to which we do not pay 
sufficient heed —tears apparently torn from Nature by foreboding . She 
was recently bereft of a friend, a girl she idolized, and this frightful loss constantly haunted her imagination. As she was thoroughly acquainted 
with her father, as she knew to what extents he carried his wild behavior, 
she was persuaded her young friend had fallen prey to the Pr ésident’s 
villainies, for he had never managed to induce the missing person to 
accord him certain privileges. The thing was not unlikely. Adelaide 
imagined the same would someday befall her; nor was that improbable. The Prés ident, in her regard, had not paid the same attention to the 
problem of religion Durcet had in the interests of Constance, no, he had allowed all that nonsense to be born, to be fomented, supposing that his writings and his discourses would easily destroy it. He was mistaken: 
religion is the nourishment upon which a soul such as Adelaide’s feeds. 
In vain the Président had preached, in vain he had made her read books, 
the young lady had remained a believer, and all these extravagances, 
which she did not shar e, which she hated, of which she was the victim, 
fell far short of disabusing her about illusions which continued to make 
for her life’s happiness. She would go and hide herself to pray to God, 
she’d perform Christian duties on the sly, and was unfailingly  and very 
severely punished, either by her father or by her husband, when surprised 
in the act by the one or the other.  
Adelaide patiently endured it all, fully convinced Heaven would 
someday reward her. Her character was as gentle as her spirit, and her benevolence, one of the virtues for which her father most detested her, 
went to the point of extreme. Curval, whom that vile class of the 
poverty -stricken irritated, sought only to humiliate it, to further depress 
it, or to wring victims from it; his generous daughter, on the other hand, 
would have foregone her own necessities to procure them for the poor, 
and she had often been espied stealing off to take to the needy sums 
which were intended for her pleasures. Durcet and the Président finally succeeded in scolding and pounding good manners into her, and in 
ridding her of this corrupt practice by withholding absolutely all the means whereby she could resume it. Adelaide, having nothing left but her tears to bestow upon the poor, went none the less to sprinkl e them 
upon their woes, and her powerless howbeit staunchly sensitive spirit was incapable of ceasing to be virtuous. One day she learned that some poor woman was to come to prostitute her daughter to the Président because 
extreme need bade her do so; the enchanted old rake was already 
preparing himself for the kind of pleasure -taking he liked best. Adelaide 
had one of her dresses sold and immediately got the money put in the 
mother’s hands; by means of this small assistance and some sort of a 
sermon, she d iverted the woman from the crime she was about to 
commit. Hearing of what she had done, the Président proceeded to such 
violences with her —his daughter was not yet married at the time —that 
she was a fortnight abed; but all that was to no avail: nothing could put a 
stop to this gentle soul’s tender impulses.  
Julie,  the Président’s wife, the Duc’s elder daughter, would have 
eclipsed the two preceding women were it not for something which 
many behold as a capital defect, but which had perhaps in itself aroused  
Curval’s passion for her, so true is it that the effects of passions are 
unpredictable, nay, inconceivable, and that their disorder, the outcome of disgust and satiety, can only be matched by their irregular flights. Julie 
was tall, well made although qui te fat and fleshy, had the most lovely 
brown eyes in the world, a charming nose, striking and gracious features, the most beautiful chestnut brown hair, a fair body of the most appetizing fullness, an ass which might easily have served as a model to 
the on e Praxiteles sculpted, her cunt was hot, strait, and yielded as 
agreeable a sensation as such a locale ever may; her legs were handsome, 
her feet charming, but she had the worst -decked mouth, the foulest 
teeth, and was by habit so dirty in every other part  of her body, and 
principally at the two temples of lubricity, that no other being, let me repeat it, no other being but the Président, himself subject to the same 
shortcomings and unquestionably fond of them, nay, no one else, despite 
her allurements, cou ld have put up with Julie. Curval, however, was mad 
about her; his most divine pleasures were gathered upon that stinking 
mouth, to kiss it plunged him into delirium, and as for her natural 
uncleanliness, far from rebuking her for it, to the contrary he en couraged 
her in it, and had finally got her accustomed to a perfect divorce from 
water. To these faults Julie added a few others, but they were surely less 
disagreeable: she was a vast eater, she had a leaning toward drunkenness, 
little virtue, and I belie ve that had she dared try it, whoredom would 
have held little by way of terror for her. Brought up by the Duc in a total 
abandon of principles and manners, she adopted a whore’s philosophy, and she was probably an apt student of all its tenets; but, throug h yet 
another very curious effect of libertinage, it often happens that a woman who shares our faults pleases us a great deal less in our pleasures than 
one who is full of naught but virtues: the first resembles us, we 
scandalize her not; the other is terr ified, and there is one very certain 
charm the more.  Despite his proportions, the Duc had sported with his daughter, but 
he had had to wait until she was fifteen, and even so had not been able 
to prevent Julie from being considerably damaged by the adventure, 
indeed, so much so that, eager to marry her off, he had been forced to put a term to pleasure -taking of this variety and to be content with 
delights less dangerous for her, but at least as fatiguing. Julie gained little by gaining the Président, whose prick, as we know, was exceedingly thick and, furthermore, however much she was dirty from neglect of 
herself, she could not in any wise keep up with a filthiness in debauch 
such as the one that distinguished the Président, her beloved spouse.  
Aline,  Julie’s younger sister and really the daughter of the Bishop, 
possessed habits and defects and a character very unlike her sister’s.  
She was the most youthful of the four, she had just become eighteen; 
she had a fetching, exuberantly healthy, and almost pert li ttle 
countenance; a little turned -up nose; brown eyes full of expression and 
vivacity; a delicious mouth; a most shapely though somewhat tall figure, well-fleshed; the skin a bit dark but soft and fine; the ass rather on the 
ample side but well- molded, a p air of the most voluptuous buttocks that 
ever a libertine eye may behold, the love mound brown -haired and 
pretty, the cunt a trifle low or, as they say, à l’anglaise, but as tight as one 
might wish, and when she was presented to the assembly she was thoroughly a maid. And she still was at the time the party we are to 
chronicle got under way, and we shall see in what manner her 
maidenhead was annihilated. As for the first fruits of her ass, the Bishop 
had been peacefully plucking them every day for the past eight years, but 
without, however, arousing in his dear daughter much of a taste for these 
exercises: she, despite her mischievous and randy air, only cooperated out 
of obedience and had never hinted that she shared the slightest pleasure in the infamies w hose daily victim she was. The Bishop had left her in 
the most profound ignorance, scarcely did she know how to read or 
write, and she had absolutely no idea of religion’s existence; her mind 
was natural, it was that of a child, she would give droll replie s, she liked 
to play, she loved her sister a great deal, detested the Bishop out of all 
measure, and feared the Duc as she dreaded fire. On the wedding day, 
when she discovered herself naked and surrounded by the four men, she wept, and moreover did all th at was asked of her, acting without pleasure 
as without ill -temper. She was sober, very clean, and having no other 
fault but that of laziness, nonchalance reigned in all her movements and doings and everywhere about her person, despite the liveliness 
announced by her bright eyes. She abhorred the Président almost as 
much as she hated her uncle, and Durcet, who treated her with no excess of consideration, nevertheless seemed to be the only one for whom she 
appeared to have no repugnance.  
These then were the eight principal characters in whose company we 
are going to enable you to live, good reader. It is now time to divulge the object of the singular pleasures that were proposed.  
It is commonly accepted amongst authentic libertines that the 
sensations communicated by the organs of hearing are the most flattering and those whose impressions are the liveliest; as a 
consequence, our four villains, who were of a mind to have voluptuousness implant itself in the very core of their beings as deeply 
and as overwhelmi ngly as ever it could penetrate, had, to this end, 
devised something quite clever indeed.  
It was this: after having immured themselves within everything that 
was best able to satisfy the senses through lust, after having established 
this situation, the pla n was to have described to them, in the greatest detail and in due order, every one of debauchery’s extravagances, all its 
divagations, all its ramifications, all its contingencies, all of what is 
termed in libertine language its passions. There is simply no conceiving 
the degree to which man varies them when his imagination grows inflamed; excessive may be the differences between men that is created 
by all their other manias, by all their other tastes, but in this case it is 
even more so, and he who should  succeed in isolating and categorizing 
and detailing these follies would perhaps perform one of the most 
splendid labors which might be undertaken in the study of manners, and 
perhaps one of the most interesting. It would thus be a question of finding some  individuals capable of providing an account of all these 
excesses, then of analyzing them, of extending them, of itemizing them, of graduating them, and of running a story through it all, to provide coherence and amusement. Such was the decision adopted. After 
innumerable inquiries and investigations, they located four women who 
had attained their prime —that was necessary, experience was the 
fundamental thing here —four women, I say, who, having spent their 
lives in the most furious debauchery, had reached the state where they 
could provide an exact account of all these matters; and, as care had been 
taken to select four endowed with a certain eloquence and a fitting turn 
of mind, after much discussion, recording, and arranging, all four were 
ready to insert , each into the adventures of her life, all the most 
extraordinary vagaries of debauch, and to do so in such an order and at 
such a pace that the first, for example, would work into the tale of her 
life’s activities the one hundred and fifty simple passions and the least 
esoteric or most ordinary deviations; the second, within the same 
framework, an equal number of more unusual passions involving one or 
more men with one or several women; the third was also to introduce into her narration one hundred and fifty of the most criminal whimsies 
and those which most outrage the laws of both Nature and religion; and 
as all these excesses lead to murder and as these murders committed 
through libertinage are infinitely various and are just as numerous as the occasions upon which the libertine’s inflamed imagination adopts 
different tortures, the fourth was to adorn the events of her life with a 
meticulous report upon one hundred and fifty assorted examples of them. In the meantime, our libertines, surrounded, as at th e outset I 
indicated, by their wives and also by other objects in every kind, were to pay close heed, were to be mentally heated, and were to end by extinguishing, by means of either their wives or those various objects, the 
conflagration the storytellers were to have lit. There is surely nothing 
more voluptuous in this project than the luxurious manner whereby it 
was carried out, and they are both this manner and these several 
recitations which are to compose this work; wherewith, having said this 
much, I advise the overmodest to lay my book aside at once if he would not be scandalized, for ’tis  already clear there’s not much of the chaste in 
our plan, and we dare hold ourselves answerable in advance that there’ll 
be still less in its execution. Insomuch as  the four actresses we have been 
speaking of play a most essential role in these memoirs, we believe, even 
were we to have to beg the reader’s forgiveness therefor, we should still 
feel obliged to describe them; they will narrate, they will act: such being  
the case, is it possible that they remain unknown? Banish all expectation 
of beauties portrayed, although there were doubtless in the plans 
provisions for employing these four creatures physically as well as 
morally; be that as it may, neither their charm s nor their years were the 
deciding factors, but rather their minds and their experience only that counted, and with what regards the latter, our friends could not possibly 
have made better choices.  
Madame Duclos  was she to whom they entrusted the relating  of the 
one hundred and fifty simple passions; the woman who went by this name was forty -eight years of age, still in fairly good condition and 
preserving the vestiges of beauty; she had very handsome eyes, an exceedingly fair skin, and one of the most spl endid and plumpest asses 
that could ever favor your gaze; a mouth both clean and fresh, superb 
breasts, and pretty brown hair, a heavy figure but a noble one, and all the 
looks and the tone of a brilliant whore. She had spent her life, as shall be observed , in places and under circumstances where indeed she had been 
obliged to study what she is going to relate, and to see her was to realize she must have gone to the task with wit and verve, with ease and interest.  
Madame Champville  was a tall woman of about  fifty, slender, well 
made, having the most voluptuous quality in her look and bearing; a faithful devotee of Sappho, she had that kind of expression even in her 
slightest movements, in her simplest gestures, in her least words. She 
had ruined herself for the sake of keeping girls and, had it not been for 
this predilection to which she generally sacrificed everything she was 
able to earn abroad, she might have been comfortably well to do. For a 
long time she had been in public service, and during recent yea rs had 
been making her way as an outfitter in her turn, but had confined herself 
to a limited practice, her clients being reliable rakehells of a certain age; 
never did she receive young men, and this prudent conduct was lucrative 
and did something to impr ove her affairs. She had been blond, but a 
more venerable tint, and that of wisdom, was beginning to color her hair; her eyes were still exceedingly attractive, blue, and they contained a most agreeable expressiveness. Her mouth was lovely, still fresh, mi ssing 
no teeth as yet, she was flat -chested but had a belly which was good, but 
had never aroused envy, her mound was rather prominent, and her 
clitoris protruded three inches when well warmed; tickle this part of her and one was certain to see her fly int o an ecstasy in no time, and 
especially if the service were rendered by a female. Her ass was very flabby and worn from use, entirely soft, wrinkled, withered, and so toughened by the libidinous customs she in recounting her history will 
explain to us, tha t one could do everything one wished without her 
feeling anything there. One strange and assuredly very rare thing, above 
all in Paris: she was as much a maid on this side as a girl emerging from 
a convent, and perhaps, had it not been for the accursed par t she put to 
use, and put to use with people who cared for nothing but the 
extraordinary and whom, consequently, that side pleased, perhaps, I say, 
had it not been for that part, this singular virginity might have perished 
with her.  
Madame Martaine,  a port ly matron of fifty -two, very well preserved 
and very healthy and blessed with the biggest and most beautiful rump 
one could wish for, boasted the precise opposite by way of adventure. She had devoted her life to sodomitical debauch, and was so well 
familia rized therewith she tasted absolutely no joy save therefrom. A 
natural deformity (she had also been blessed with an obstruction) having 
prevented her from knowing any other, she had given herself over to this 
kind of pleasure, led to it both by her inability to do anything else and by 
early habit, in consideration of which she clung fast to this lubricity 
wherein ’twas  declared she was yet delicious, ready to brave come what 
might, dreading nothing. The most monstrous engines were as naught to her, in fact such were the ones she preferred, and the sequel to these papers will perhaps reveal her still giving valorous fight beneath the 
standards of Sodom, as the most intrepid of buggeresses . Her features 
were gracious enough, but signs of languor and of decline  were 
beginning to mar her attractions, and but for the plumpness sustaining her yet, she might have been thought timeworn and frayed.  
As for Madame Desgranges,  she was vice and lust personified; tall, 
thin, fifty -six, ghostly pale and emaciated, dead dull eyes, dead lips, she 
offered an image of crime about to perish for lack of strength. She had 
once upon a time been brunette, there were some who even maintained 
she’d had a beautiful body; not long thereafter it had become a mere 
skeleton capable of inspi ring nothing but disgust. Her ass, withered, 
worn, marked, torn, more resembled marbled paper than human skin, 
and its hole was so gaping, sprung, and rugose that the bulkiest machines could, without her knowing a thing, penetrate it dry. By way 
of crowning graces, this generous Cytherean athlete, wounded in several 
combats, was missing one nipple and three fingers. She limped, and was without six teeth and an eye. We may perhaps learn by what order of 
attacks she had been so mistreated; but one thing is ce rtain: nothing she 
had suffered had induced her to mend her ways, and if her body was the 
picture of ugliness, her soul was the depository of all the most unheard of 
vices and crimes: an arsonist, a parricide, a sodomite, a tribade, a 
murderess, a poisoner , guilty of incest, of rape, of theft, of abortions, and 
of sacrileges, one might truthfully affirm that there is not a single crime 
in the world this villain had not committed herself, or had others 
commit for her. Her present calling was procuring; she was one of 
society’s most heavily titled furnishers, and as to much experience she 
joined a more or less agreeable prattle, she had been chosen to fill the 
role of fourth storyteller, that is to say, the one in whose story the greatest number of infamies and horrors were to be combined. Who 
better than a creature who had performed them all could have played 
this part?  
These women once found, and found in every article to be such as was 
desired, the friends turned their attentions to accessories. They had from the outset planned to surround themselves with a large number of lust -
inspiring objects of either sex, but when it was brought to their attention 
that the only setting in which this lubricious roister could conveniently 
be held was that same château in S witzerland belonging to Durcet, the 
one in which he had dispatched little Elvire, when, I say, it was 
remarked that this château of only moderate size would not be able to 
lodge so great a throng of inhabitants, and that, what was more, it might 
well prove  unwise or dangerous to bring along such a host, the list of 
subjects was trimmed to thirty -two in all, the storytellers included: to 
wit: four of that class, eight young girls, eight young boys, eight men endowed with monstrous members, for the delights of passive sodomy, and four female servants. But thoroughness went into the recruiting of 
all that; a year was devoted to these details, an enormous amount of 
money too, and these are the measures they employed to obtain the most 
delicious specimens of all France could offer in the way of eight little 
girls: sixteen intelligent procuresses, each accompanied by two 
lieutenants, were sent into the sixteen major provinces of France, while a seventeenth was occupied with the same work in Paris only. Each of 
these outfitters was given a rendezvous at one of the Duc’s estates on the 
outskirts of Paris, and all of them were to appear there, during the same 
week, exactly ten months after the date of their departure—this was the 
period they were given for searching. E ach was to bring back nine 
subjects, which came to a total of one hundred and fifty -three girls, from which one hundred and fifty -three a choice of only eight was to be 
made.  
The procuresses were instructed to emphasize high birth, 
virtuousness, and the most delicious visage possible; they were to 
conduct their researches so as to draw material chiefly from eminent 
families, and were not to hand over any girl without being able to prove 
that she had been forcibly abducted from either a convent housing pensi onnaires  of quality, or from the home of a family, and that a family 
of distinction. Whatever was not superior to the class of bourgeoisie, and what from these upper classes was not both very virtuous and wholly virgin and impeccably beautiful, would be re fused without mercy; spies 
were posted to survey these women’s proceedings and to supply the society with exhaustive and prompt reports of what they were doing.  
For each suitable subject found, they were paid thirty thousand francs, 
the agents assuming all  expenses. The costs were incredible. With 
respect to age, it was fixed at from twelve to fifteen; anything above or below was pitilessly rejected. At the same time, under identical 
circumstances, with the same means, at the same expense, seventeen 
agents of sodomy likewise scoured the capital and the provinces in search 
of little boys, and their rendezvous was set for a month after the selection 
of the girls. As for the young men whom we propose henceforth to 
designate as fuckers, the size of the member wa s the sole criterion: 
nothing under ten or eleven inches long by seven or eight around was 
acceptable. Eight men labored throughout the kingdom to supply this 
demand, and their rendezvous was scheduled to fall a month after the 
little boys’. While the stor y of how these selections were made and 
received is not our foremost concern, it might not be inappropriate at 
this point to insert a word on the subject in order to bring out yet a little more of our four heroes’ genius; it seems to me that nothing which 
serves to enlarge the reader’s understanding of these figures and to shed 
light upon a party as extraordinary as the one we are going to describe, 
can be judged irrelevant.  
The time for the assembling of the little girls having arrived, everyone 
converged upon the Duc’s estate. Some few procuresses having been 
unable to fill their quota of nine, some others having lost their charges en route, either by illness or flight, only one hundred and thirty of them 
were present at the rendezvous, but what charms, gr eat God! never, I 
believe, have so many charms been seen gathered together in one place. 
Thirteen days were given over to this examination, and each day ten of 
them were inspected. The four friends gathered in a circle, and in its 
middle was placed the lit tle girl, dressed as she had been at the moment 
she had been seized; the procuress responsible for her capture recited her 
history. If something of the conditions of high birth or virtue were 
wanting, the inquiry went no deeper, the child was forthwith rej ected, 
without appeal, and sent on her way, and the purveyor lost all that she 
had spent in connection with her. Next, having provided all the vital 
particulars, the procuress was asked to retire, and the child was 
interrogated in order to determine whether what had just been alleged 
were true. If all seemed well, the procuress was called in again, and she 
lifted the girl’s skirts from behind, so as to expose her buttocks to the group; this was the first thing it wished to examine. The slightest defect 
in this part was grounds for immediate rejection; if on the contrary 
naught were amiss here, she was ordered to strip, or was stripped, and, 
naked, she passed and passed again, five or six times over, from one of 
our libertines to the other, she was turned abo ut, she was turned the 
other way, she was fingered, she was handled, they sniffed, they spread, they peeped, they examined the state of the goods, was it new, was it 
used, but did all this coolly and without permitting the senses’ illusion to 
upset any asp ect of the examination. This done, the child was led away, 
and beside her name inscribed upon a ballot, the examiners wrote passed  
or failed  and signed their names; these ballots were then dropped into a 
box, the voters refraining from communicating their opinions to one 
another; all the girls examined, the box was opened: in order to be accepted, a girl had to have our four friends’ names in her favor. The 
absence of one name was enough to exclude her instantly and, in every 
instance, inexorably, as I have  said: the unsuitable ones were kicked 
directly out, set at large, alone and without a guide, save when, as 
happened with perhaps a dozen, our libertines frolicked with them after 
the choices had been made and before turning them over to their procuresses.  
This round resulted in the exclusion of fifty candidates, the other 
eighty were gone over afresh, but with much greater exactitude and severity; the least defect warranted instantaneous dismissal. One, lovely 
as the day, was weeded out because one of her teeth grew a shade higher 
from the gum than the rest; more than twenty others were refused 
because they were daughters of nothing better than bourgeois. Thirty 
were eliminated during this second round, hence only fifty were left. The 
friends resolved not t o continue to the third round until having first been 
relieved of some fuck through these fifty aspirants’ own ministry, this in 
order that the senses’ perfect calm could insure saner and sounder choice. 
Each of the quartet encompassed himself by a team of  twelve or thirteen 
children; members of each team adopted varying attitudes, teams were 
shifted, everything was directed by the procuresses, and everything was 
brought off with such dexterity, there was, in a word, so much lubricity in the doing that sper m flew, temperatures subsided, and another thirty 
disappeared from the race. Twenty remained; that was still a dozen too 
many. Further expedients to procure calm were resorted to, every means 
wherefrom one would suppose disgust could be born was employed, but 
the twenty still remained, and how might one have subtracted from a 
number of creatures so wonderfully celestial you would have declared 
they were the very work of a divinity? Equal in beauty, something else had to be discovered which could at least aw ard eight of them some kind 
of superiority over the twelve others, and what the Président then proposed was worthy indeed of all the disorder of his mind. That made no difference; the suggestion was accepted: it had to do with finding out 
which of them would best do something the chosen eight would be often 
called upon to do. Four days sufficed amply to decide this question, and at last twelve were given their leave, but not blankly as in the case of the 
others; they provided a week’s complete and exhaustiv e amusement, then 
were put into the keeping of the procuresses who soon made a pretty 
penny from the prostitution of creatures as distinguished as these. As for 
the successful eight, they were installed in a convent to keep until the 
day of departure, and in order to reserve until the designated period the 
pleasure of enjoying them, the four colleagues did not touch them before 
then.  
I’ll not be so foolhardy as to attempt to describe these beauties: they 
were all of them superior in an equal degree: my brus h strokes would 
necessarily be monotonous; I shall be content to give their names and to 
affirm that upon my word it is perfectly impossible to obtain an idea of 
such an assemblage of graces, of attractions, of perfections, and that had 
Nature wished to give Man an idea of what her greatest and wisest art 
can create, she would not have presented him with other models.  The first was named Augustine:  she was fifteen, the daughter of a 
Languedoc baron, and had been kidnaped from a convent in 
Montpellier.  
The s econd was named Fanny:  she was the daughter of a counselor to 
the parliament of Brittany and had been abducted from her father’s own 
château.  
The third was named Zelmire:  she was fifteen years old, she was the 
Comte de Terville’s daughter, and he idolized her. He had taken her 
hunting with him on one of his estates in Beauce and, having left her 
alone in the forest for a moment, she had been pounced upon at once. She was an only child and, with a dowry of four hundred thousand 
francs, was the following year  to have married a very great lord. It was 
she who most wept and grieved at the horror of her fate.  
The fourth was named Sophie:  she was fourteen and was the daughter 
of a rather well- to-do gentleman who lived on his estate in Berry. She 
had been seized wh ile on a walk with her mother, who, seeking to 
defend her, was flung into a river, where she expired before her 
daughter’s eyes.  
The fifth was named Colombe:  she was from Paris, the child of a 
counselor to Parliament; she was thirteen and had been kidnaped while 
returning in the evening to her convent with a governess, after leaving a 
children’s ball. The governess had been stabbed to death.  
The sixth was named Hébé:  she was just twelve, the daughter of a 
cavalry captain, a nobleman who lived in Orléans. Th e youngster had 
been enticed and carried away from the convent where she was being 
brought up; two nuns had been bought. You could not hope to find 
anything more seductive or sweeter.  The seventh was named Rosette:  she was thirteen and was the child of 
the Lieutenant -General of Chalon- sur-Saône. Her father had just died, 
she was with her mother in the countryside near the city, and was 
captured within sight of her relatives by agents disguised as thieves.  
The last was named Mimi or Michette:  she was twelve,  she was the 
daughter of the Marquis de Sénanges and had been kidnaped on her father’s estate in the Bourbonnais while on a carriage drive which she had been allowed to take with two or three women from the château. 
The women were murdered. It will be rema rked that the preparations 
for these revels cost much money and many crimes; to such people, 
treasure means exceedingly little, and as for crime, one was then living in 
an age when it was not by any means probed and punished the way it is 
nowadays. Hence e verything succeeded, and so prettily that, the inquests 
amounting to virtually nothing at all, our libertines were never troubled 
by consequences.  
The time drew nigh for the examination of the little boys. Easier to 
obtain, their number was greater. The pi mps produced one hundred and 
fifty of them, and it will surely be no exaggeration if I affirm that they at 
least equaled the little girls, as much in their delicious faces as in their 
childhood graces, their candor, their innocence, and their elevated rank . 
Thirty thousand francs were paid for each of them, the same sum given for the girls, but the entrepreneurs risked nothing, because this game 
being more delicate and far more to the taste of our epicures, it had been 
decided that no one would be put in da nger of losing his expenses, that 
while the lads with whom it was impossible to come to terms would be 
rejected, as they would be put to some use they would also be paid for.  
Their examination was conducted like that of the girls, ten were 
verified each day, but with the very wise precaution which had been a little too much neglected with the girls, with the precaution, I say, of 
always preceding the examination by a discharge arranged with the aid of 
the ten who were under present scrutiny. The others were half of a mind 
to bar the Président from the ceremony, they were wary of the 
depravation of his tastes; they had feared, in the selection of the girls, 
being made the dupes of his accursed predilection for infamy and 
degradation: he promised to keep himse lf in check, and if he kept his 
word, it is unlikely he did so without difficulty, for when once a 
damaged or diseased imagination becomes accustomed to these species 
of outrages against good taste and Nature, outrages which so deliciously flatter it, it i s no easy matter to restore such a person to the path of 
righteousness: it seems as if the desire to satisfy his longing displaces reason in his judgments. Scorning what is truly beautiful, no longer cherishing but what is frightful, desire’s pronouncement s correspond to 
its criteria, and the return to truer sentiments would appear to him to be a wrong done those principles whence he should be most sorry to stray. One hundred hopefuls were found unanimously approved when the 
initial séances were over, and t hese decisions had to be five times 
reconsidered in order to arrive at the small group alone to be accepted. 
Thrice in succession fifty survived the balloting, and then, to reduce that number to the stipulated eight, the jurors were compelled to resort to 
unusual measures in order somehow to lessen the appeal of idols still glamorous despite everything they had been able to do to them. The idea 
occurred to them to dress the boys as girls: twenty -five were eliminated 
by this trick which, lending to a sex the y worshiped the garb of one to 
which they had become indifferent, depreciated their value and ruined almost all the illusion. But nothing could alter the voting on the twenty -
five that were left. ’Twas  all in vain, in vain they spattered their fuck about, in vain they wrote their names upon the ballots at the same 
moment they discharged, in vain they put to use the expedient adopted 
with the little girls, the twenty -five proved irreducible every time, and at 
last they agreed to have them draw lots. Here are the names they gave 
the lucky ones who remained, their age, their birth, and a word or two 
about their adventures; their portraits? I cry off: Cupid’s own features 
were surely no more delicate, and the models Albani sought from which to choose traits for his divine angels must certainly have been inferior by 
far. 
Zélamir  was thirteen years old: he was the only son of a gentleman out 
of Poitou who had been bringing him up with the greatest care. Escorted by a single domestic, he had been sent to Poitiers to visit a 
kinsman; our rogues ambushed them, slew the domestic, and made off 
with the child.  
Cupidon  was the same age: he had been a pupil in a school at La 
Flèche, and was the son of a gentleman dwelling in the vicinity of that town. A trap was laid for th e boy, he was kidnaped while on an outing 
the students used to take on Sundays. He was the prettiest pupil in the 
entire collège.  
Narcisse  was twelve; he was a Knight of Malta. He had been abducted 
in Rouen, where his father filled an honorable post compat ible with his 
nobility; the boy was en route to the Collège de Louis -le-Grand at Paris, 
he was waylaid and seized while on the road.  
Zéphyr,  the most delicious of the eight, it being supposed that their 
excessive beauty might allow the possibility of a cho ice, was from Paris; 
he was pursuing his studies there, in a famous pension. His father, a 
ranking officer, did all in his power to get his son back, and failed; 
money had seduced the headmaster of the school, who delivered seven specimens, of whom six wer e refused. Zéphyr had set the Du c’s head to 
spinning, and the latter protested that were it to have cost a million to 
bugger the boy he would have paid it in cash on the spot. He reserved to 
himself the lad’s initiation, and it was generally granted him. O  tender 
and delicate child, what disproportion and what a dreadful fate were in 
store for you!  
Céladon  was the son of a magistrate of Nancy; he was captured at 
Lunéville, whither he had gone to visit his aunt. He had just attained his 
fourteenth year. In t his case a girl was used to bait the trap. Céladon and 
she were introduced, the little wench drew him into the snare by 
feigning love for him; he was negligently chaperoned, the stroke was 
successful.  
Adonis  was fifteen; he was ravished at Plessis, where h e was enrolled in 
school. He was the son of a judge of the assize courts who raised a great 
hue and cry, but all to no avail, the capture had been so nicely planned 
no one knew a thing about it. Curval, who had been mad about the child for two years, had m ade his acquaintance at his father’s house, and it was 
he who had supplied the means and information necessary to debauch 
him. The others were greatly surprised to find such sensible good taste in 
a head so depraved as Curval’s, and he, most proud, profite d from the 
event to show his colleagues that, as was plainly to be seen, he still could 
boast a sometimes fine palate. The child recognized him and fell to weeping, but the Président consoled him with the assurance it would be 
to him would befall the deflo wering, and while uttering these comforting 
words, he wobbled his enormous engine against those frail little 
buttocks. Curval asked the assembly for the boy; his request was 
unopposed.  Hyacinthe  was fourteen years old; he was the son of a retired officer 
living in a small city in Champagne. He adored hunting and was taken 
while afield, his father having been so imprudent as to allow him to set 
out alone.  
Giton  was twelve; he was kidnaped at Versailles from amidst the page 
boys at the King’s stables. He was the son of a man of consequence from the Nivernais, who not six months prior had brought him to Versailles. He was very simply abducted while walking alone on the avenue de 
Saint -Cloud. He became the Bishop’s passion, and to the Bishop was 
the prize decreed.  
Those, thus, were the masculine deities our libertines prepared for 
their lubricity; we will see in due time and place the use to which they 
were put. One hundred and forty -two subjects remained, but whereas 
there had been much trifling over the eight, there was none with this 
game: not one of the defeated candidates was dismissed until he had 
served some purpose.  
Our libertines spent a month with them at the Duc’s château. As they 
were on the eve of setting forth, as all the practical arrangements were 
completed, the company had little else to do but amuse itself until the 
day of departure. When at last they were thoroughly fed up with their 
sport, they fell upon a pleasant means for disposing of what had 
provided it: that was to sell the boys to a Turkish pirate, a scheme 
whereby no trace of them would be left and a part of the costs would be 
recovered. They were sent in small groups to a place near Monaco, the 
Turk came to get them and lead them off into slavery, doubtless a 
dreadful fate, but one where by, none the less, our four villains were 
hugely entertained.  And now came the moment for choosing the fuckers. Those of this 
class who failed to meet the standards were the cause of no 
embarrassment; being mature and reasonable men, it was enough to pay 
them for their trouble, their traveling expenses, and send them home. 
The eight experts who had contracted to furnish the fuckers had, 
furthermore, many fewer obstacles to surmount, since the specifications 
were by and large concrete and the conditions made  no difference at all. 
Thus it was fifty came to the rendezvous; from amongst the twenty 
biggest, the eight youngest and most attractive were singled out, and 
since in the sequel mention will almost never be made save of the four biggest of the eight, I sh all restrict myself to naming these.  
Hercule,  with a body hewn in the image of the god whose name he 
had been given, was twenty -six years of age and was endowed with a 
member eight and one- quarter inches around by thirteen long. Nothing 
more beautiful nor more majestic has ever been seen; this tool was almost always upright, and with only eight discharges, so tests revealed, it could fill a pint measure to the brim. Hercule was also very gentle, very 
sweet, and had an interesting countenance.  
Antinoüs,  so named because, like Hadrian’s favorite, he had, together 
with the world’s prettiest prick, its most voluptuous ass, and that is exceedingly rare. Antinoü s wielded a device measuring eight inches in 
circumference and twelve in length. He was thirty and had a  face worthy 
of his other features.  
Bum -Cleaver  lugged a club so amusingly shaped it was nearly 
impossible for him to perform an embuggery without splitting the ass, 
whence came the name he bore. The head of his prick resembled the 
heart of an ox, it was e ight and three -eighths inches around; behind it, 
the shaft measured only eight, but was crooked and had such a curve it neatly tore the anus when penetrating it, and this quality, very precious 
to libertines as jaded as ours, had made him singularly sought  after.  
Invictus,  so named because, no matter what he did, his erection was 
perpetual, was furnished with an engine eleven inches long and seven and fifteen- sixteenths inches around. Greater ones, who had difficulty 
stiffening, had been turned away to make  room for him who, regardless 
of the quantity of discharges he produced in a day, rose heavenward at the slightest touch.  
The other four were of about the same dimensions and the same 
shape. The forty- two rejected candidates provided a fortnight’s 
entertai nment and, after the friends had put them through their paces 
and worn them to the bone, they were well rewarded and bidden adieu.  
Nothing now remained but the choice of the four ladies -in-waiting, 
and this final stage was without doubt the most picturesque. The 
Président was not the only one whose tastes were depraved; his three 
friends, and especially Durcet, were indeed a little tainted by his accursed, crapulous, and debauched mania which causes one to find a 
greater, more piquant attraction in an old, disgusting, and filthy object 
than in what Nature has fashioned most divinely. Explaining this fancy 
would probably be difficult, but it exists in many people; Nature’s 
disorder carries with it a kind of sting which operates upon the high -
keyed sort with p erhaps as much and even more force than do her most 
regular beauties; it has been proven, moreover, that when one’s prick is aloft, it is horror, villainy, the appalling, that pleases; well, where are 
they more emphatically present than in a vitiated objec t? If ’tis  the filthy 
thing which pleases in the lubricious act, then certainly the more filthy 
the thing, the more it should please, and it is surely much filthier in the 
corrupted than in the intact and perfect object.  No, as to that there’s no doubt. Furthermore, beauty belongs to the 
sphere of the simple, the ordinary, whilst ugliness is something 
extraordinary, and there is no question but that every ardent imagination 
prefers in lubricity the extraordinary to the commonplace. Beauty, health never stri ke one save in a simple way; ugliness, degradation deal a far 
stouter blow, the commotion they create is much stronger, the resultant agitation must hence be more lively; in the light of all this, there should be no cause for astonishment in the fact that an immense crowd of 
people prefer to take their pleasure with an aged, ugly, and even stinking 
crone and will refuse a fresh and pretty girl, no more reason to be astonished at that, I say, than at a man who for his promenades prefers 
the mountains’ arid a nd rugged terrain to the monotonous pathways of 
the plains. All these matters depend upon our constitutions, our organs, 
upon the manner whereby they are affected, and it is no more in our 
power to change our tastes in this connection than it is in our power to 
alter the form of our bodies.  
Be that as it may, such, as I have said, was the dominating taste of the 
Président and, to tell the truth, the taste which came near to 
predominating in his three confreres, for when it came to choosing 
female servants, their views were identical, and we are about to see from 
this choice that its making bespoke the constitutional disorder and depravation to which we have just alluded.  
The most painstaking search was initiated in Paris; the four creatures 
needed were final ly located; however loathsome may be their portraits, 
the reader will none the less permit me to draw them: that I do so is 
essential to that aspect of manners the elucidation of which is one of the 
principal aims of this work.  Marie  was the name of the first one; she had been the servant of a 
notorious brigand quite recently put to death on the wheel, whipping 
and branding had been her penalty. She was fifty- eight years old, had 
almost no hair left, her nose stood askew, her eyes were dull and rheumy, 
her mouth large and filled with her thirty- two teeth, yes, they were all 
there, but all were yellow as sulphur; she was tall, raw -boned, having 
whelped fourteen children, all fourteen of whom, said she, she’d strangled from fear they’d turn out ne’er -do-wells.  Her belly rippled like 
the waves of the sea, and one of her buttocks was devoured by an abscess.  
The second was known as Louison;  she was sixty, stunted, 
hunchbacked, blind in one eye, and lame, but she had a fine ass for her age and her skin was still in  fairly good repair. She was as wicked as the 
devil and forever ready to commit any horror and every extravagance one 
could possibly demand of her.  
Thérèse  was sixty -two; she was tall, thin, looked like a skeleton, not a 
hair was left on her head, not a tooth in her mouth, and from this opening in her body she exhaled an odor capable of flooring any 
bystander. Her ass was peppered with wounds, and her buttocks were so 
prodigiously slack one could have furled the skin around a walking stick; 
the hole in this  splendid ass resembled the crater of a volcano what for 
width, and for aroma the pit of a privy; in all her life, Thérèse declared, 
she had never once wiped her ass, whence we have proof positive that the shit of her infancy yet clung there. As for her va gina, it was the 
receptacle of everything ungodly, of every horror, a veritable sepulcher 
whose fetidity was enough to make you faint away. She had one twisted 
arm and limped in one leg.  The fourth was called Fanchon;  six times she had been hanged in 
effigy, and not a crime exists in this world she had not committed. She 
was sixty -nine, she was flat -nosed, short, and heavy; she squinted, had 
almost no forehead, had nothing but two old teeth in her stinking maw, 
and they were ready to fall out, an erysipelas  blazed all over her ass and 
hemorrhoids the size of your fist hung from her anus, a frightful chancre consumed her vagina, and one of her thighs had been entirely burned. She was dead drunk three -quarters of the year, and in that condition, her 
stomach be ing very weak, she vomited over everything. Despite the 
batch of hemorrhoids adorning it, her asshole was naturally so large that all unawares she blew driblets and farts and often more besides. Apart 
from acting as servants in the luxurious recreation pal ace the four friends 
had in mind, these women were also to lend a hand at all the 
convocations and render all the lubricious services and ministrations that 
might be required of them.  
As soon as all these matters had been decided and the summer having 
already begun, they turned their thoughts to the transporting of the 
various objects which were, during the four months’ sojourn on Durcet’s 
estate, to render its inhabitation comfortable and agreeable. A vast store 
of furniture and mirrors, of viands and wine s and liqueurs of all kinds 
were ordered borne thither, workmen were sent there, and little by little the numerous subjects were conducted to the château where Durcet, 
who had gone ahead, received, lodged, and established them as they 
arrived.  
But the mome nt has come to give the reader a description of the 
renowned temple appointed for so many luxurious sacrifices throughout the projected four -month season. He will observe with what great care 
they had chosen a remote and isolated retreat, as if silence, di stance, and stillness were libertinage’s potent vehicles, and as if everything which 
through these qualities instills a religious terror in the senses had 
necessarily and evidently to bestow additional charm upon lust. We are 
going to picture this retreat not as once it was, but in the state of embellishment and yet more perfect solitude that resulted from the four 
friends’ efforts.  
To reach the place one had first to get to Basel; at that city you 
crossed the Rhine, beyond which the road became steadily narrower 
until you had to abandon your carriage. Soon afterward you entered the 
Black Forest, you plunged about fifteen leagues into it, ascended a difficult, tortuous road that, without a guide, would be absolutely 
impracticable. By and by you caught sight of a sinister and mean hamlet 
of charcoal burners and gamekeepers; there began the territory Durcet 
owned, and the hamlet was his; as this little village’s population was 
composed almost entirely of thieves or smugglers, Durcet easily 
befriended it, and his first order to the inhabitants was expressly to enjoin them under no circumstances to allow anyone whomsoever to 
pass on toward the château after the 1st of November, the date by which 
the entire society was to be assembled in it. He distributed weapons to 
his faithful vassals, granted them certain privileges they had been long 
soliciting, and the barrier was lowered. That done, and the gates tightly 
sealed, one will see by the following description how difficult of access was Silling, the name Durcet’s c hâteau bore.  
Having passed the village, you begin to scale a mountain almost as 
high as the Saint -Bernard and infinitely more difficult to ascend, for the 
only way to reach the summit is by foot; not that the route is forbidden 
to pack mules, but such are the precipices which everywhere border the 
one so very narrow path that must be followed, that you run the greatest danger if you ride; six of the mules used to transport supplies and food 
perished, taking with them two laborers who had thought to mount 
astride them. Five full hours are required to reach the top of the 
mountain, and there you come upon another extraordinary feature 
which, owing to the precautions that had been taken, became a new 
barrier so insurmountable that none but birds might have over come it: 
the topographical accident we refer to is a crevice above sixty yards wide 
which splits the crest into northern and southern parts, with the result 
that, after having climbed up the mountain, it is impossible, without 
great skill, to go back down it. Durcet had united these two parts, between which a precipice fell to the depth of a thousand feet and more, 
by a fine wooden bridge which was destroyed immediately the last of the 
crew had arrived, and from this moment on, all possibility of communicat ing with the Château of Silling ceased. For, cross the bridge 
and you come down into a little plain about four acres in area; the plain is surrounded on all sides by sheer crags rising to the clouds, crags which envelop the plain within a faultless screen.  The passage known as the 
bridge path is hence the only one by which you may descend into or 
communicate with the little plain; the bridge removed or destroyed, 
there is not on this entire earth a single being, of no matter what species 
you may imagine, ca pable of gaining this small plot of level land.  
And it is in the center of this flat space so well surrounded, so solidly 
protected, that one finds Durcet’s château. Yet another wall, thirty feet high, girds it; beyond the wall a moat filled with water and exceedingly 
deep defends a last tall and winding enclosure; a low and strait postern 
finally leads into the great inner court around which all the living 
quarters are built, and they are very capacious, very well furnished thanks 
to the arrangements latte rly concluded; one discovers a long gallery on the first floor. I would have it remarked that the description I am about 
to give of the apartments corresponds not to what in former times they 
may have been, but to the manner in which they had just been 
rearranged and distributed in accordance with our libertines’ common 
conception. From the gallery you moved into a very attractive dining hall 
provided with buffets shaped like towers which, communicating with the 
kitchen, made it possible to serve the compan y its food hot, promptly, 
and without the help of any waiters. From this dining hall, hung in 
tapestries, warmed by heating devices, furnished with ottomans, with 
excellent armchairs, and with everything which could make it both comfortable and pleasing to the eye, you passed into a large living room 
or salon, simple, plain, but exceedingly warm and equipped with the very best furniture; adjacent to this room was an assembly chamber intended for the storytellers’ narrations. This was, so to speak, the lists  for the 
projected jousts, the seat of the lubricious conclaves, and as it had been decorated accordingly, it merits something by way of a special description.  
Its shape was semicircular; set into the curving wall were four niches 
whose surfaces were faced  with large mirrors, and each was provided 
with an excellent ottoman; these four recesses were so constructed that 
each faced the center of the circle; the diameter was formed by a throne, 
raised four feet above the floor and with its back to the flat wall , and it 
was intended for the storyteller; in this position she was not only well 
before the four niches intended for her auditors, but, the circle being 
small, was close enough to them to insure their hearing every word she 
said, for she was placed like an actor in a theater, and the audience in 
their niches found themselves situated as if observing a spectacle in an 
amphitheater. Steps led down from the throne, upon them were to sit the objects of debauchery brought in to soothe any sensory irritation 
provoked by the recitals; these several tiers, like the throne, were 
upholstered in black velvet edged with gold fringe, and the niches were furnished with similar and likewise enriched material, but in color dark blue. At the back of each niche was a little door leading into an 
adjoining closet which was to be used at times when, having summoned the desired subject from the steps, one preferred not to execute before everyone the delight for whose execution one had summoned that 
subject. These closets were pro vided with couches and with all the other 
furnishings required for every kind of impurity. On either side of the 
central throne an isolated column rose to the ceiling; these two columns 
were designed to support the subject in whom some misconduct might 
merit correction. All the instruments necessary to meting it out hung 
from hooks attached to the columns, and this imposing sight served to 
maintain the subordination so indispensable to parties of this nature, a 
subordination whence is born almost all the ch arm of the voluptuousness 
in persecutors’ souls.  
One could walk from this semicircular room directly to a chamber 
which formed the end of this part of the living quarters. This chamber 
was a kind of boudoir, it was soundproof and secluded, but very warm 
within, very dark during the day, and its purpose was for private 
interviews and secluded contests, or for certain other secret delights which will be unveiled in the sequel. To reach the other wing, one had 
to retrace one’s footsteps, and once in the galler y, at the end of which an 
exceedingly handsome chapel was visible, one entered the opposite wing 
which completed the circuit of the inner courtyard. You discovered a 
splendid antechamber adjoined by four superb apartments, each having a 
boudoir and wash ca binets; splendid Turkish beds canopied in three -colored damask with matching furniture adorned these suites whose 
boudoirs offered everything and more of the most sensual that lubricity 
might fancy. These four units, exceptionally well -heated and 
comfortab le, were intended for the four colleagues, who were perfectly 
lodged therein. In that the protocols stipulated that their wives were to 
occupy the same quarters, no separate space was set aside for them.  
Upstairs, the second story contained about the same number of 
apartments, but they were otherwise divided; you first came upon, to one 
side, a vast room bordered by eight niches, each having a little bed—
these were the girls’ quarters, and beside them were two small chambers for the old women who were to ha ve charge of them. Further along, a 
pair of pretty rooms had been set aside for two of the storytellers. Now turning about and going in the other direction, you found a similar eight -niched room for the little boys; by it were two rooms for the 
duennas app ointed to supervise them; and beyond these were two more 
rooms, also alike, for the two other storytellers. Eight cheerful rooms, as fine as anything you have yet seen, formed the eight fuckers’ quarters, 
although these individuals were destined to do very little sleeping in 
their own beds. Below, on the ground floor, were the kitchens and, near 
them, six small chambers for the six persons to whom the preparation of food had been confided; amongst them were three cooks renowned for 
their art; they were all females, women having been preferred for a pleasure outing like this one, and I believe the decision was just. The 
cooks were assisted by three robust young scullery maids, but none of the 
kitchen staff was to appear at the revels, that was not its purpose , and if 
the rules imposed in this connection were violated, ’tis  merely because 
libertinage stops at nothing, and the true way of extending and multiplying one’s desires is to attempt to impose checks upon them. One of these three underlings was to look a fter the numerous livestock which 
had been fetched to the château —with the exception of the four aged 
ladies who were meant for household duties, there were no domestics 
save for these three cooks and their seconds. But depravity, cruelty, disgust, infamy,  all those passions anticipated or experienced, had 
erected another locality whereof it is a matter of urgency that we give a sketch, for the laws essential to the proper unfolding of our tale demand that we depict it with thoroughness now.  
A fatal stone t here was which, cunningly made, could be raised from 
below the step of the altar in the little Christian temple we discerned from the gallery; beneath that stone one beheld a spiral stairway, very 
narrow and very steep, whose three hundred steps could conv ey you 
down into the bowels of the earth, to a kind of vaulted dungeon, closed 
by triple doors of iron, and in which was displayed everything the 
cruelest art and the most refined barbarity could invent of the most 
atrocious, as much for gripping one with terror as for proceeding to horrors. And there below, what tranquillity! to what degree might not 
the villain be reassured who brought his victim there! What had he to 
fear? He was out of France, in a safe province, in the depths of an 
uninhabitable forest , within this forest in a redoubt which, owing to the 
measures he had taken, only the birds of the air could approach, and he 
was in the depth of the earth’s entrails. Woe, a hundred times woe to the unlucky creature who in the midst of such abandonment we re to find 
himself at the mercy of a villain lawless and without religion, whom crime amused, and whose only interest lay in his passions, who heeded 
naught, had nothing to obey but the imperious decrees of his perfidious 
lusts. I know not what will transp ire in that nether place, but this I may 
say without doing our tale a disservice, that when a description of the dungeon was given the Duc , he reacted by discharging three times in 
succession.  
Everything being ready at last, everything perfectly disposed, the 
subjects installed, the Duc, the Bishop, Curval, and their wives, with the 
four second -ranking fuckers in their train, set off (Durcet and his wife, 
together with all the rest, having arrived beforehand, as we have previously noted), and not without infinite difficulty, finally reached the château on the evening of the 29th of October. Immediately they had 
crossed it, Durcet had the bridge cut. But that was not all: having 
inspected the place, the Duc decided that, since all the provisions were 
within t he fortress, and since therefore they had no need to leave it, it 
were necessary, in order to forestall external attack, which was little 
dreaded, and escapes from within, the possibilities of which were less unlikely, it were necessary, I say, to have walled shut all the gates, all the 
passages whereby the château might be penetrated, and absolutely to 
enclose themselves inside their retreat as within a besieged citadel, without leaving the least entrance to an enemy, the least egress to a 
deserter. The recommendation was put into effect, they barricaded 
themselves to such an extent there was no longer any trace left of where 
the exits had been; and then they settled down comfortably inside.  
After the provisions we have just cited had been taken, the two da ys 
still remaining before the 1st of November were devoted to resting the subjects, that they might make a fresh appearance at the scenes of 
debauchery soon to begin, and during this interval the four friends 
labored over a code of laws which, as soon as it was brought to 
perfection and signed, was promulgated to those concerned. Before 
advancing to the matter, it is essential that these articles of government 
be made known to the reader who, after the exact description we have given him of everything, will  now have no more to do than follow the 
story, lightly and voluptuously, his mind impeded by nothing, his 
memory embarrassed by no unexpected intrusions.  
STATUTES  
The company shall rise every day at ten o’clock in the morning, at which 
time the four fuckers who have not been on duty during the night shall come to 
pay the friends a visit and shall each bring a little boy; they shall pass from one bedchamber to another, successively. They shall perform as bidden by the 
friends’ likings and desires, but during the preliminaries the little boys shall 
serve only as a tempting prospect, for it has been decided and planned that the 
eight maidenheads of the little girls’ cunts shall remain intact until the month 
of December, and their asses shall likewise remain in bond, as shall the asses of 
the eight little boys, until the month of January, at which times the respective seals shall be broken, and this in order to allow voluptuousness to become 
irritated by the augmentation of a desire incessantly inflamed and never  
satisfied, a state which must necessarily lead to that certain lascivious fury the 
friends shall strive to provoke, considering it one of lubricity’s most highly 
delectable situations.  
At eleven o’clock, the friends shall repair to the quarters appointed for the 
little girls. In that place will be served breakfast  consisting of chocolate, or of 
roasts cooked in Spanish wine, or of other appropriate restoratives. This 
breakfast shall be served by the eight little girls, naked, aided by the two elders, 
Marie  and Louison, assigned to the seraglio of girls, the other two elders being 
assigned to that of the boys. If, during this breakfast, the friends are moved to commit impudicities with the little girls, before or after, the latter shall lend themselves there unto with the resignation prescribed to them, and wherein 
they shall not be found wanting without severe punishment being the consequence. But it is agreed that at this hour there shall be undertaken no 
secret or private exercises, and that if a moment’s w antonizing be desired, it 
shall be conducted openly and before the public present at the morning meal.  
These little girls shall adopt the general custom of kneeling at all times 
whenever they see or meet a friend, and they shall remain thus until told to 
stand; they, the wives, and the elders shall alone be subject to these regulations, 
wherefrom the others are dispensed, but everyone shall be bound never to 
address the friends save as my Lord.  
Before leaving the girls’ apartments, that one of the friends w ho is invested 
with the month’s stewardship (it being intended that for the space of a month 
one friend shall be in general supervision of everything, each friend acceding to 
the office in his turn and in the following order: Durcet during November, the 
Bishop during December, the Président during January, the Duc during 
February), he, then, who is the month’s presiding officer, before leaving the 
girls’ quarters, shall inspect them all, to determine whether they are in the state 
wherein they have been inst ructed to maintain themselves, whereof the elders 
shall be each morning apprised and which will be determined by the need that 
exists for them to keep in such and such a state.  
As it is strictly forbidden to relieve oneself anywhere save in the chapel, 
which has been outfitted and intended for this purpose, and forbidden to go 
there without individual and special permission, the which shall be often 
refused, and for good reason,  the month’s presiding officer shall scrupulously 
examine, immediately after breakfast, all the girls’ water closets, and in the 
case of a contravention discovered in the one above -designated place or in the 
other, the delinquent shall be condemned to suffer the penalty of death.  The friends shall move from there into the little boys’  apartments in order to 
perform the same inspections and similarly to pronounce capital punishment 
against offenders. The four little boys who have not been that morning with 
the friends, shall now receive them when they enter their chamber and shall untro user themselves before them, the other four shall remain standing at 
attention, awaiting the orders which are given them. Messieurs may or may not indulge in lewd byplay with the four they have not until now seen during the day, but whatever they do shall be done publicly; no intimate commerce 
shall be held at this hour.  
At one o’clock, those of the girls or the boys, of mature and of young years, 
who have obtained permission to satisfy urgent needs, that is to say, the heavier sort, and this permission sha ll never be but most sparingly accorded, 
and at the most to a third of the subjects, those, we repeat, shall betake 
themselves to the chapel where everything has been artistically arranged for the 
voluptuous delights falling under this head. In this place they will find the 
four friends who shall wait for them until two o’clock and never any longer, and who shall distribute and adjust them as they judge proper to the delights of 
this order which they may be moved to taste.  
From two to three the first two ta bles shall be served: they shall dine 
simultaneously, one in the girls’ large apartment, the other in that of the young boys: the three kitchen servants shall serve these two tables. At the first shall sit 
the eight little girls and the four elders; at the  second the four wives, the eight 
little boys, and the four storytellers. During their meal, Messieurs will be pleased to gather in the living room where they will chat together until three 
o’clock. Just before this hour, the eight fuckers shall make  their  appearance here, 
as well clothed and as well adorned as it is in their power to be.  At three shall be served the masters’ dinner, and the honor to be present 
there shall be enjoyed by none but the eight fuckers; this meal shall be served by 
the four wives , entirely naked, aided by the four elders, clad as sorceresses; to 
the latter shall fall the task of bringing the plates from the towers into which 
the servants, on the other side, shall have put them, and the plates shall be 
handed to the wives, who shal l deposit them on the table. The eight fuckers, in 
the course of the dinner, will be at liberty to handle and touch the unclothed 
bodies of the wives in whatever manner and to whatever extent they please, 
without the said wives being permitted to refuse or  defend themselves; the 
fuckers will even be able to go to the point of employing insults and of 
thickening their sticks by apostrophizing them with all the invectives they may 
see fit to pronounce.  
The friends shall rise from table at five, at which time these Messieurs only 
(the fuckers shall retire until the hour of general assembly), these Messieurs 
only, I say, shall pass into the salon, where two little boys and two little girls, 
who shall be changed daily, shall, in a state of nudity, serve them coff ee and 
liqueur; nor shall it be at this point in the day’s activities Messieurs shall 
permit themselves diversions which might enervate them; conversation shall 
be limited to simple jesting.  
Shortly before six o’clock, the four children who have been servi ng, shall 
withdraw and go promptly to dress themselves. At exactly six, Messieurs shall 
pass into the assembly chamber heretofore described. They shall each of them 
repair to their respective alcoves, and the following distribution shall be 
observed by the others: upon the throne shall be the storyteller, the tiers below 
the throne shall be occupied by the sixteen children, so arranged that four of 
them, that is to say, two girls and two boys, shall be situated directly opposite 
each niche; each niche shall  have before it a like quatrain; this quatrain shall be specially allocated to the niche before which it is placed, the niches alongside 
being excluded  from making any claims upon it, and these quatrains shall be 
diversified each day, never shall the same niche have the same quatrain. Each child in each quatrain shall have one end of a chain of artificial flowers secured to his arm, the other end of the chain leading to the niche, so that when the 
niche’s proprietor wishes any given child in his quatrain, h e has but to tug the 
garland, and the child shall come running and fling himself at the master’s 
feet. 
Above the quatrain shall be situate an elder, attached to the quatrain, and 
responsive to the orders of the chief of that quatrain’s niche.  
The three sto rytellers who are not on active service as raconteurs during the 
month shall be seated upon a bench at the foot of the throne, assigned to no one but yet ready to do anyone’s bidding. The four fuckers appointed to spend the night with the friends may be absent from the assembly; they shall be in their 
rooms, busy grooming themselves for the coming night, at which time great 
feats shall be regularly expected of them. With respect to the four others, they shall be each one at the feet of one of the friends, w ho shall be in his niche and 
upon his couch beside that one of the wives whose turn it is to be with any 
given husband. This wife shall be at all times naked, the fucker shall wear a closefitting singlet and shorts of taffeta, pink in color, the month’s storyteller 
shall be attired as an elegant courtesan, as shall be her three companions, the 
little boys and the little girls of the quatrains shall always be differently and splendidly costumed, one quatrain in Asiatic style, one in Spanish, another in 
Turkish garb, a fourth in Greek, and on the following day otherwise; but all 
these costumes shall be of taffeta or of lawn; at no time shall the lower half of 
the body be discomfited by any raiment, and the removal of a pin shall suffice 
to bare it completely.  As for the elders, they shall alternately interpret the Graeae, nuns, fairies, 
sorceresses, and upon occasion, widows. The doors to the closets contiguous to 
the niches shall be half opened at all times, and the closets shall be kept at a 
warm temperature by stoves, and shall be garnished with all the 
appurtenances required for various debauches. Four candles shall burn in each 
of the closets, and fifty in the auditorium.  
Punctually at six o’clock, the storyteller shall begin her story, which the 
friends ma y interrupt at any point and as frequently as they please; this 
narration shall last until ten o’clock in the evening, and during this time, as 
its object is to inflame the imagination, every lubricity will be permitted, save 
however for those which might be prejudicial to the approved schedule of 
deflowerings, which shall be at all times rigorously observed; apart from this, 
Messieurs may do what they like with their fucker, wife, quatrain, quatrain elder, and even with the storytellers if this whim move t hem, and that either 
in their niche or in the adjacent closet. The narration shall be suspended for as long as the pleasures of him whose needs interrupt it continue, and when he shall have done and be sated, the tale shall be resumed. 
The evening meal sha ll be served at ten. The wives, the storytellers, and the 
eight little girls shall without delay proceed to dine by themselves, women never being admitted to the men’s supper, and the friends shall sup with the 
four fuckers not scheduled for night duty, an d with four little boys. Aided by 
the elders, the four other boys shall serve.  
The evening meal concluded, Messieurs shall pass into the salon for the 
celebration of what are to be called the orgies. Everyone shall convene there, 
both those who have supped  apart and those who have supped with the 
friends, the four fuckers chosen for the night’s service being excepted.  The salon shall be heated to an unusual temperature, and illuminated by 
chandeliers. All present shall be naked: storytellers, wives, little girls, little 
boys, elders, fuckers, friends, everything shall be pell -mell, everyone shall be 
sprawled on the floor and, after the example of animals, shall change, shall 
commingle, entwine, couple incestuously, adulterously, sodomistically, 
deflowerings being at all times banned, the company shall give itself over to 
every excess and to every debauch which may best warm the mind. When  ’tis 
time for these deflowerings, it shall be at this moment and in these 
circumstances that those operations shall be per formed, and once a child shall be 
initiate, it shall be available for every enjoyment, in all manners and at all 
times.  
The orgies shall cease at precisely two in the morning, the four fuckers 
designated for nocturnal exercise shall come, in elegant undres s, to lead away 
each of them the friend wherewith he is to bed, each friend shall be provided 
also with one of the wives or with a deflowered subject, when deflowered 
subjects there be, or with a storyteller, or with an elder to pass the night ’ twixt 
her a nd his fucker, and all this according to his disposition, whereunto but one 
clause is put, that he submit himself to prudent arrangements whence it may 
result that each friend varies his companions every night, or is able so to do.  
Such shall be the daily order of procedure. In addition, each week of the 
seventeen prescribed as the period of the sojourn at the château shall be marked 
by a festival. There shall be, first of all, marriages, full particulars relating to 
which shall be made available in due tim e and place. But as the first of these 
matches shall be made between the youngest of the children, who are not able 
to consummate them, they will in no wise disturb the schedule established for 
the deflorations. Marriages between adults being all post- defloratory, their consummation will damage nothing since, in acting, the friends shall be 
enjoying only what has been enjoyed already.  
The four elders, to be held answerable for the behavior of their four children, 
shall, when it is faulty, report it to the m onth’s presiding officer, and each 
Saturday there shall take place a common meting out of punishments, at the 
time of the orgies. An exact list of accumulating delinquencies shall be kept 
until then.  
With what regards misbehavior on the part of the storyte llers, their 
punishments shall be one -half that of the children, because their talents are to 
some purpose, and talent must always be respected. As for errors in the conduct 
of the wives, they shall always be rewarded by punishment double that given 
the ch ildren.  
Should any subject in some way refuse anything demanded of him, even 
when incapacitated or when that thing is impossible, he shall be punished with utmost severity; ’tis  for him to provide, for him to discover ways and 
means.  
The least display of m irth, or the least evidence given of disrespect or lack of 
submission during the debauch activities, shall be esteemed one of the gravest 
of faults and shall be one of the most cruelly punished.  
Any man taken  flagrante delicto with a woman shall be punishe d by the 
loss of a limb when authorization to enjoy this woman has not hitherto been granted him.  
The slightest religious act on the part of any subject, whomsoever he be, 
whatsoever be that act, shall be punished by death.  Messieurs are expressly enjoined  at all gatherings to employ none but the 
most lascivious language, remarks indicative of the greatest debauchery, 
expressions of the filthiest, the most harsh, and the most blasphemous.  
The name of God shall never be uttered save when accompanied by 
invectives or imprecations, and thus qualified it shall be repeated as often as possible.  
With respect to their tone, it shall at all times be exceedingly brutal, 
exceedingly harsh, and exceedingly imperious when addressing the wives and the little girls, but w heedling, whorish, and depraved when addressing the 
men whom the friends, by adopting with them the role of women, should 
regard as their husbands.  
Any friend who fails to comply with any one of these articles, or who may 
take it into his head to act in ac cordance with a single glimmer of common 
sense or moderation and above all to spend a single day without retiring dead 
drunk to bed, shall be fined ten thousand francs.  
Whenever a friend experiences the need to relieve himself heavily, a woman 
from that cl ass he considers fitting shall be obliged to accompany him, to attend 
to those duties he shall during this activity indicate to her.  
No subject, whether male or female, shall be allowed to fulfill duties of 
cleanliness whatsoever they may be, and above all  those consequent upon the 
heavy need relieved, without express permission from the month’s presiding 
officer, and if it be refused him, and if despite that refusal he surrender to this 
need, his punishment shall be of the very rudest.  
The four wives shall  have no prerogatives of any kind over the other 
women; on the contrary, they shall at all times be treated with a maximum of rigor and inhumanity, and they shall be frequently employed upon the vilest 
and most painful enterprises, such as for example the cleaning of the private 
and common privies established in the chapel. These privies shall be emptied 
only once every week, but always by them, and they shall be severely punished if they resist the work or accomplish it poorly.  
Should a subject attempt eva sion while the assembly is sitting, he shall be 
punished by death instantly, whomsoever he be.  
The cooks and their assistants shall be respected, and those of the friends 
who violate this article shall pay a fine of one thousand gold  louis. With 
regard to these fines, they shall all be specially employed, upon the return to 
France, for the initial expenses incidental to a new party, either in this same 
kind, or in another.  
These affairs being settled and these regulations published on the 
30th, the Duc spen t the morning of the 31st inspecting everything, 
having the statutes repeated aloud, and scrupulously examining the 
premises to see whether they were susceptible to assault or favorable to 
escape.  
Having concluded that one would have to have wings or the d evil’s 
powers to get out or in, he reported his findings to the society and 
devoted the evening to haranguing the women. By his order they were 
all convoked in the auditorium, and having mounted that kind of tribune 
or throne intended for the storyteller, here more or less is the speech he delivered to them:  
“Feeble, enfettered creatures destined solely for our pleasures, I trust 
you have not deluded yourselves into supposing that the equally absolute and ridiculous ascendancy given you in the outside world  would be accorded you in this place; a thousand times more subjugated than 
would be slaves, you must expect naught but humiliation, and obedience 
is that one virtue whose use I recommend to you: it and no other befits 
your present state. Above all, do not  take it into your heads to rely in the 
least upon your charms; we are utterly indifferent to those snares and, 
you may depend upon it, such bait will fail with us. Ceaselessly bear in 
mind that we will make use of you all, but that not a single one of you need beguile herself into imagining that she is able to inspire any feeling 
of pity in us. Roused in fury against the altars that have been able to 
snatch from us some few grains of incense, our pride and our libertinage shatter them as soon as the illusi on has satisfied our senses, and 
contempt almost always followed by hatred instantly assumes the preeminence hitherto occupied by our imagination. What, furthermore, might you offer that we do not know by heart already? what will you 
tender us that we shal l not grind beneath our heels, often at the very 
moment delirium transports us? 
“Useless to conceal it from you: your service will be arduous, it will be 
painful and rigorous, and the slightest delinquencies will be requited 
immediately with corporal and afflicting punishments; hence, I must 
recommend to you prompt exactness, submissiveness, and a total self-
abnegation that you be enabled to heed naught but our desires; let them 
be your only laws, fly to do their bidding, anticipate them, cause them to be born. Not that you have much to gain by this conduct, but simply 
because, by not observing it, you will have a great deal to lose.  
“Give a thought to your circumstances, think what you are, what we 
are, and may these reflections cause you to quake —you are b eyond the 
borders of France in the depths of an uninhabitable forest, high amongst 
naked mountains; the paths that brought you here were destroyed behind you as you advanced along them. You are enclosed in an 
impregnable citadel; no one on earth knows you are here, you are beyond 
the reach of your friends, of your kin: insofar as the world is concerned, 
you are already dead, and if yet you breathe, ’tis  by our pleasure, and for 
it only. And what are the persons to whom you are now subordinated? 
Beings of a profound and recognized criminality, who have no god but 
their lubricity, no laws but their depravity, no care but for their debauch, 
godless, unprincipled, unbelieving profligates, of whom the least 
criminal is soiled by more infamies than you could numbe r, and in 
whose eyes the life of a woman—what do I say, the life of a woman? the 
lives of all the women who dwell on the face of the earth, are as 
insignificant as the crushing of a fly. There will, doubtless, be few 
excesses to which we will not be carrie d; let not one of them dismay you, 
without the flutter of an eyelash lend yourselves to them all, and faced 
with whatever it may be, show patience, submission, and courage. If, 
unhappily, some amongst you succumb to our passions’ intemperance, let her adju st bravely to her fate: we are not going to exist forever in this 
world, and the most fortunate thing that can befall a woman is to die 
young. Our ordinances have been read to you: they are very wise and 
well-designed for your safety and for our pleasures;  obey them blindly, 
and expect the worst from us should we be irritated by your misbehavior. 
Several amongst you have ties with us, I know, and perhaps they embolden you, and perhaps you hope for indulgence on this account; you 
would be most gravely mistaken were you to put much store by them: no 
blood attachment is sacred in the view of people like ourselves, and the 
more they seem so to you, the more their rupture will stimulate the 
perversity in our spirits. Daughters, wives, it is to you, then, I addres s 
myself at present: expect us to grant you no prerogative, you are herewith advised that you will be treated with an even greater severity than the 
others, and that specifically to point out to you with what scorn we view 
the bonds whereby you perhaps thi nk us constrained.  
“Moreover, do not simply wait for us to specify the orders we would 
have you execute: a gesture, a glance, often simply one of our internal 
feelings will announce our desire, and you will be as harshly punished for 
not having divined it as you would be were you, after having been 
notified, to ignore that desire or flout it. It is up to you to interpret our 
movements, our glances, our gestures, to interpret our expressions, and 
above all not to be mistaken as to our desires. Let us suppose , for 
example, this desire were to see a particular part of your body and that, 
through clumsiness, you were to exhibit some other —you appreciate to 
what extent such contempt would be upsetting to our imaginations, and 
you are aware of all that one risks by chilling the mind of a libertine who, 
let us presume, is expecting an ass for his discharge, and to whom some 
fool presents a cunt.  
“By and large, offer your fronts very little to our sight; remember that 
this loathsome part, which only the alienation of her wits could have 
permitted Nature to create, is always the one we find most repugnant. 
And relative to your ass itself, there are precautions to observe: not only 
would you be well -advised, upon presenting it, to hide the odious lair 
which accompanies it, but it behooves you to avoid the display, at certain 
moments, of an ass in that certain state wherein other folk desire always 
to find it; you probably understand me; and furthermore, the four 
duennas will furnish you later on with instructions which will complete 
the explanation of everything.  
“In short: shudder, tremble, anticipate, obey—and with all that, if you 
are not very fortunate, perhaps you will not be completely miserable. No intrigues amongst you, no alliances, none of that ridiculous friend ship 
between girls which, by softening the heart in one sense, in another 
renders it both more ill -tempered and less well -disposed to the one and 
simple humiliation to which you are fated by us; consider that it is not at 
all as human beings we behold you,  but exclusively as animals one feeds 
in return for their services, and which one withers with blows when they refuse to be put to use.  
“You have seen with what stringency you are forbidden anything 
resembling any act of religion whatsoever. I warn you: fe w crimes will be 
more severely punished than this one. It is only too well known that in your midst there are yet a few fools unable to bring themselves to abjure 
this infamous God and abhor his worship; I would have you know that 
these imbeciles will be s crupulously examined, and there is no extremity 
they will not suffer who are so unlucky as to be taken in the act. Let 
them be persuaded, these stupid creatures, let them henceforth be 
convinced that in all the world there are not twenty persons today who cling to this mad notion of God’s existence, and that the religion he 
invokes is nothing but a fable ludicrously invented by cheats and 
impostors, whose interest in deceiving us is only too clear at the present 
time. In fine, decide for yourselves: were th ere a God and were this God 
to have any power, would he permit the virtue which honors him, and 
which you profess, to be sacrificed to vice and libertinage as it is going to be? Would this all- powerful God permit a feeble creature like myself, 
who would, face to face with him, be as a mite in the eyes of an elephant, would he, I say, permit this feeble creature to insult him, to 
flout him, to defy him, to challenge him, to offend him as I do, 
wantonly, at my own sweet will, at every instant of the day?”  This little sermon concluded, the Duc descended from the chair and, 
with the exception of the four elders and the four narrators, who knew 
very well they were there as sacrificers and priestesses rather than as 
victims, except for those eight individuals, I s ay, everyone burst into 
tears, and the Duc, not much touched by the scene, left those enacting it 
to conjecture, jabber, and complain to each other, in perfect certainty the 
eight spies would render a thorough report of everything; and off he went to spend  the night with Hercule, the member of the troupe of 
fuckers who had become his most intimate favorite in the capacity of a lover, little Zéphyr still having, as a mistress, the first place in his heart. In that upon the following morning everything was to begin, the 
mechanism was to start functioning, everyone accordingly completed final arrangements, went soundly to sleep, and on the morrow at the stroke of ten, the curtain rose upon a scene of libertinage which was to 
continue unimpeded, in strict compliance with prescription, until and 
including the 28th day of February.  
And now, friend -reader, you must prepare your heart and your mind 
for the most impure tale that has ever been told since our world began, a 
book the likes of which are met with neither a mongst the ancients nor 
amongst us moderns. Fancy, now, that all pleasure -taking either 
sanctioned by good manners or enjoined by that fool you speak of 
incessantly, of whom you know nothing and whom you call Nature; 
fancy, I say, that all these modes of t aking pleasure will be expressly 
excluded from this anthology, or that whenever peradventure you do 
indeed encounter them here, they will always be accompanied by some 
crime or colored by some infamy.  
Many of the extravagances you are about to see illustra ted will 
doubtless displease you, yes, I am well aware of it, but there are amongst them a few which will warm you to the point of costing you some fuck, 
and that, reader, is all we ask of you; if we have not said everything, 
analyzed everything, tax us no t with partiality, for you cannot expect us 
to have guessed what suits you best. Rather, it is up to you to take what 
you please and leave the rest alone, another reader will do the same, and 
little by little, everyone will find himself satisfied. It is th e story of the 
magnificent banquet: six hundred different plates offer themselves to 
your appetite; are you going to eat them all? No, surely not, but this 
prodigious variety enlarges the bounds of your choice and, delighted by 
this increase of possibilities, it surely never occurs to you to scold the Amphitryon who regales you. Do likewise here: choose and let lie the 
rest without declaiming against that rest simply because it does not have 
the power to please you. Consider that it will enchant someone els e, and 
be a philosopher.  
As for the diversity, it is authentic, you may be sure of it; study closely 
that passion which to your first consideration seems perfectly to resemble another, and you will see that a difference does exist and that, however 
slight it may be, it possesses precisely that refinement, that touch which 
distinguishes and characterizes the kind of libertinage wherewith we are 
here involved.  
We have, moreover, blended these six hundred passions into the 
storytellers’ narratives. That is one  more thing whereof the reader were 
well to have foreknowledge: it would have been too monotonous to catalogue them one by one outside the body of the story. But as some 
reader not much learned in these matters might perhaps confuse the 
designated passions  with the adventure or simple event in the narrator’s 
life, each of these passions has been carefully distinguished by a marginal 
notation: a line, above which is the title that may be given the passion. This mark indicates the exact place where the accoun t of the passions 
begins, and the end of the paragraph always indicates where it finishes.2 
But as numerous personages participate in a drama of this kind, 
notwithstanding the care we have taken in this introduction to describe 
and designate each one …we sh all provide an index which will contain 
the name and age of every actor, together with a brief sketch of them all; so that should the reader, as he moves along, encounter what seems to him an unfamiliar figure, he will have merely to turn back to this inde x, 
and if this little aid to his memory suffice not, to the more thorough portraits given earlier.  
THE ROMANCE OF THE SCHOOL FOR 
LIBERTINAGE DRAMATIS PERSONAE 
The Duc de Blangis,  fifty, built like a satyr, endowed with a monstrous 
member and prodigious str ength; he may be regarded as the depository 
of every vice and every crime. He has killed his mother, his sister, and three of his wives.  
The Bishop of X***  is his brother; forty -five years old, more slender and 
more delicate than the Duc; a nasty mouth. He  is deceitful, adroit, a 
2 In spite of what Sade says regarding the marginal notations intended to distinguish 
a particular passion described from the recital of a simple event in the life of the 
narrator, he apparently never made them. The first complete French edition, prepared for publication by Maurice Heine from Sade’s original manuscript, does not contain 
them; nor does the 1953 Pauvert edition, which follows Heine scrupulously. In  the 
latter, from which the present translation was made, the storytellers’ narrations, in 
which the recital of the various passions is presented, are given in italics. We have here 
followed the example of the 1953 French edition. —Tr.                                           faithful sectary of sodomy, active and passive, he has an absolute 
contempt for all other kinds of pleasure, he has brought about the cruel 
deaths of the two children whose sizable fortune was left in trust with 
him; he is a nervous type, so sensitive he nearly swoons upon discharging.  
The Président de Curval,  sixty; a tall, thin, lank man, with sunken, 
dead eyes, an unhealthy mouth, the walking image of low license and libertinage, frightfully dirty about his body and attaching voluptuousness 
thereto. He has been circumcised, his erection is rare and difficult, it 
does take place however, and he ejaculates almost every day. His tastes 
induce him to prefer men; all the same, he has no scorn for a maid. For 
singularities in his tastes , he has a fondness for old age and whatever is 
kin to him in filthiness. He is endowed with a member practically as 
thick as the Duc’s. In late years he has seemed as though unstrung by 
debauchery, and he drinks a great deal. He owes his fortune solely to  
murders and is nominally guilty of one, a dreadful one, whose details are 
contained in his biography previously given. When discharging, he 
experiences a sort of lubricious rage; it drives him to cruel deeds.  
Durcet,  banker, fifty -three, a great friend of  the Duc, and his 
schoolmate; he is short, squat, and chubby, but his body looks healthy, pretty, and fair. He has the figure of a woman and all a woman’s tastes: 
by his little firmness deprived of giving women pleasure, he has imitated that sex and has hi mself fucked at any time of day or night. He is also 
rather fond of a good mouthing, ’tis  the only expedient which is able to 
afford him an agent’s pleasures. His pleasures are his only gods, and he is constantly prepared to sacrifice everything to them. H e is clever, adroit, 
and has committed a profusion of crimes; he poisoned his mother, his wife, and her niece in order to assure his inheritance. His spirit is stoical, 
stalwart his heart, and absolutely insensible to pity. He no longer 
stiffens, his ejaculations are most rare; his instants of crisis are preceded 
by a kind of spasm which hurls him into a lubricious fury dangerous for those who are serving his passions.  
Constance,  the Du c’s wife, Durcet’s daughter; twenty -two years of age, 
she is a Roman beauty, with more majesty than finesse, plump but well -
constructed, a superb body, a unique ass, a model ass, hair and eyes very 
dark. She is not without brains or wit, and but too well senses the horror 
of her fate. A great fund of native virtue nothing has been able to 
destroy.  
Adelaide,  Durcet’s wife, the Président’s daughter; a pretty little object, 
she is twenty, blond, very tender eyes of a lovely, animated blue, she has 
about her everything of the romantic heroine. A long, well -attached 
neck, her one de fect is her mouth, which is a shade large. Small breasts 
and a little ass, but all that, though delicate, is fair and well- molded. A 
mind given to fantasy, a tender heart, excessively virtuous and believing; 
she secretly performs her Christian duties.  
Julie, the Président’s wife, elder daughter of the Duc; she is twenty -
four, fat, fleshy, with fine brown eyes, a pretty nose, striking and agreeable features, but an appalling mouth. She has little virtue and even 
pronounced tendencies to uncleanliness, alcoholism, gluttony, and whoredom. Her husband loves her for her defective mouth; this 
singularity appeals to the Président’s tastes. She has never been given 
either principles or religion.  Aline,  her younger sister, supposed daughter of the Duc, really one of 
the Du c’s wives and the Bishop’s child; she is eighteen, has a very 
agreeable and fetching countenance, abounding health, brown eyes, an 
upturned nose, a mischievous air although she is profoundly indolent and lazy. She seems as yet to have no temperament and most sincerely 
detests all the infamies she is victim of. The Bishop baptized her behind 
at the age of ten. She has been left in crass ignorance, knows neither how to read nor write, she abhors the Bishop and greatly fears the Duc. 
She is much attached  to her sister, is sober and tidy, speaks oddly and 
like a child; her ass is charming.  
Duclos,  the first storyteller; forty -eight, preserves her looks, is in good 
physical health, has the finest ass to be seen. Brunette, full figure, very 
well fleshed.  
Champville  is fifty; she is slender, well made, has lascivious eyes, she is 
a tribade, and everything about her proclaims it. Her present trade is pimping. She was once fair -haired, has pretty eyes, is long in the clitoris 
and ticklish in that part, has an as s much worn from service, but is none 
the less untupped in that place.  
Martaine  is fifty -two; she’s a procuress too, a matronly dame, hale and 
hearty; inner obstructions have prevented her from ever knowing any but 
Sodom’s delights, for which indeed she se ems to have been specially 
created, for, her age notwithstanding, she has the world’s noblest ass; it 
is both broad and big and so habituated to introductions that she can 
accommodate the weightiest engines without the flutter of an eyelash. 
She has pretty  features still, but they are beginning to fade.  Desgranges  is fifty -six; she is even now the greatest villain who has ever 
lived; she is tall, slender, pale, and was once dark- haired, she is crime’s 
personification. Her withered ass resembles marbled paper, or 
parchment, and its orifice is immense. She is one -dugged, is missing 
three fingers and six teeth, fructus belli.  There exists not a single crime 
she has not perpetrated or engineered, her prattle is pleasing to the ear, she has wit, and is currently one of the outfitters most highly respected by society.  
Marie,  the first of the duennas, is the youngest at fifty -eight; she has 
been whipped and branded, and was a servant to thieves. Her eyes are 
lackluster and running, her nose crooked, her teeth yellow , one buttock’s 
gnawed by an abscess. She has borne and killed fourteen children.  
Louison,  the second duenna, is sixty; she is small, lame, one -eyed, and 
hunchbacked, but for all that she has yet a very pretty ass. She is always 
ready for crime and is extr emely wicked. She and Marie are appointed as 
governesses to the girls, and the two following to the boys.  
Thérèse,  aged sixty -two, looks like a skeleton, has no hair, no teeth, a 
stinking mouth, an ass seamed with scars, its hole is of excessively 
generous  diameter. Filthy and fetid to an atrocious degree; she has a 
twisted arm, and she limps.  
Fanchon,  sixty-nine years old, has been six times hanged in effigy and 
has perpetrated every crime under the sun; she squints, is flat -nosed, 
short, heavy, has no for ehead, two teeth only. An erysipelas covers her 
ass, a bunch of hemorrhoids hangs from her hole, a chancre is eating her womb, she has a burnt thigh, and a cancer gnaws her breast. She is constantly drunk and vomits, farts, and shits here, there, and everywhere 
all the time, and all unawares she is doing it.  
HAREM OF LITTLE GIRLS  
Augustine , daughter of a Languedoc baron, fifteen years old, alert and 
pretty little face.  
Fanny , daughter of a Breton counselor, fourteen, a sweet and tender 
air. 
Zelmire , daughte r of the Comte de Terville, seigneur of Beauce, 
fifteen, a noble look and a very sensitive soul.  
Sophie , daughter of a gentleman from Berry, charming features, 
fourteen years.  
Colombe , daughter of a counselor to the Parliament of Paris, thirteen 
years old,  exuberant health.  
Hébé , daughter of an Orléans officer, a very libertine air, charming 
eyes, she is twelve.  
Rosette  and Michette , both look like lovely virgins. The first is thirteen 
and is the daughter of a Chalon -sur-Saône officer, the other is twelve 
and is a daughter of the Marquis de Sénanges; she was abducted from her father’s estate in the Bourbonnais.  
Their figures, the rest of their features and chiefly their asses are 
beyond all description. They were chosen from amongst one hundred and thirty.  HAREM OF LITTLE BOYS  
Zélamir , thirteen, son of a Poitou squire.  
Cupidon , same age, son of a gentleman from near La Flèche.  
Narcisse , twelve, son of a nobleman situated in Rouen, Knight of 
Malta.  
Zéphyr , fifteen, son of a general living in Paris. He is destined for the 
Duc.  
Céladon , son of a Nancy magistrate. He is fourteen.  
Adonis , son of a judge of a Paris assize court; fifteen, destined for 
Curval.  
Hyacinthe , fourteen, son of a retired officer dwelling in Champagne.  
Giton , page to the King, twelve, son of a gentleman from the 
Nivernais.  
No pen is capable of representing the graces, the features, and the 
charms of these eight children superior also to all the tongue is 
empowered to say, and chosen, as you know, from amongst a very large number.  
EIGHT FUCKERS  
Hercule , twenty -six, very pretty, but also a very mean character, the 
Duc’s favorite; his prick measures eight and one -quarter inches around 
and thirteen in length. Plentiful discharge.  Antinoüs  is thirty. A fine specimen of a man, his prick is eight inch es 
around and twelve inches long.  
Bum -Cleaver , twenty -eight years old, has the look of a satyr; his 
majestic prick is bent saber fashion, its head, or glans, is enormous, it is 
eight and three -eighths inches in circumference and the shaft eight in 
length. A fine curve to this majestic prick.  
Invictus is twenty -five, he is exceedingly ugly, but healthy and 
vigorous; the great favorite of Curval, he is continually aroused, and his 
prick is seven and fifteen- sixteenths inches around by eleven inches long.  
The four others measure from nine to ten and fifteen- sixteenths 
inches long, by from seven and a half to seven and five -eighths inches 
around, and they are from twenty -five to thirty years of age.  
End of the Introduction. Omissions I have made in it:  
1. I must  say that Hercule and Invictus are, the one a very mean character and the 
other very ugly, and that not one of the eight has ever been able to enjoy either a 
man or a woman.  
2. That the chapel is used for a toilet, and give details of this usage.  
3. That the outfitters, male and female, had cutthroats with them and under their 
orders during their forays.  
4. Give some few more details about the elders’ breasts and speak of Fanchon’s 
cancer. Also a few more touches to the descriptions of the children’s faces.    
PART THE FIRST  
THE 150 SIMPLE PASSIONS, OR THOSE 
BELONGING TO THE FIRST CLASS, 
COMPOSING THE THIRTY DAYS OF 
NOVEMBER PASSED IN HEARING THE 
NARRATION OF MADAME DUCLOS; 
INTERSPERSED AMONGST WHICH ARE THE 
SCANDALOUS DOINGS AT THE C HÂTEAU 
DURING THAT MONTH; ALL BEING SET DOWN 
IN THE FORM OF A JOURNAL.    
THE FIRST DAY  
The company rose the 1st of November at ten o’clock in the morning, as 
was specified in the statutes which Messieurs had mutually sworn faithfully to observe in every p articular. The four fuckers who had not 
shared the friends’ couches, at their waking hour brought Zéphyr to the 
Duc, Adonis to Curval, Narcisse to Durcet, and Zélamir to the Bishop. 
All four children were very timid, even more awkward, but, encouraged 
by their guides, they very nicely carried out their tasks, and the Duc 
discharged. His three colleagues, more reserved and less prodigal with 
their fuck, had as much of it deposited in them as did the Duc, but 
distributed none of their own.  
At eleven o’clock t hey passed into the women’s quarters where the 
eight young sultanas appeared naked, and in this state served chocolate, aided and directed by Marie and Louison, who presided over this 
seraglio. There was a great deal of handling and colling, and the eight poor girls, wretched little victims of the most blatant lubricity, blushed, 
hid behind their hands, sought to protect their charms, and immediately 
displayed everything as soon as they observed that their modesty irritated 
and annoyed their masters. The Du c rose up like a shot and measured 
his engine’s circumference against Michette’s slender little waist: their 
difference did not exceed three inches. Durcet, the month’s presiding 
officer, conducted the prescribed examinations and made the necessary 
searches; Hébé and Colombe were found to have lapsed, their 
punishment was pronounced at once and fixed for the following 
Saturday at orgy hour. They wept. No one was moved.  They proceeded to the boys’ apartments. The four who had not 
appeared that morning, namely Cupidon, Céladon, Hyacinthe, and 
Giton, bared their behinds in accordance with orders, and the sight 
provided an instant’s amusement. Curval kissed them all on the mouth, and the Bishop spent a moment frigging their pricks while the Duc and 
Durcet were d oing something else. The inspections were completed, no 
misconduct was discovered.  
At one o’clock Messieurs betook themselves to the chapel where, as 
you know, the sanitary conveniences were installed. The calculation of 
requirements for the coming soiree having led to the refusal of a good number of requests, only Constance, Duclos, Augustine, Sophie, 
Zélamir, Cupidon, and Louison appeared; all the others had asked 
permission and had been instructed to hold back until evening. Our four friends, ranged around the same specially constructed seat, had these 
seven subjects take their seat one after another, and then retired when 
they had enough of this spectacle. They descended to the salon where, while the women dined, they gossiped and tattled until the time came 
for them to be served their meal. Each of the four friends placed himself 
between two fuckers, pursuant to the imposed rule that barred all women 
from their table, and the four naked wives, aided by the elders costumed 
as the Graeae, served them the m ost magnificent and the most succulent 
dinner it were possible to concoct. No one more delicate, more skilled 
than the cooks they had brought with them, and they were so well paid and so lavishly provided that everything could not fail to be a brilliant 
success. As the midday fare was to be less heavy than the evening meal, 
they were restricted to four superb courses, each composed of twelve 
plates. Burgundy wine arrived with the hors d’oeuvres, Bordeaux was 
served with the entrees, champagne with the roast s, Hermitage accompanied the entremets, Tokay and madeira were served with 
dessert.  
Spirits rose little by little; the fuckers, whom the friends had granted 
every liberty with their wives, treated them somewhat untenderly. Constance was even a bit knocked about, rather beaten for having 
dawdled over bringing a dish to Hercule who, seeing himself well 
advanced in the Duc’s good graces, fancied he might carry insolence to the point of drubbing and molesting his wife; the Duc thought this very 
amusing. Curval,  in an ugly humor by the time dessert arrived, flung a 
plate at his wife’s face, and it might have clove her head in two had she 
not ducked. Spying one of his neighbors stiffen, Durcet, though they 
were still at table, promptly unbuttoned his breeches and presented his 
ass. The neighbor drove his weapon home; the operation once concluded, they fell to drinking again as if nothing had happened. The 
Duc soon imitated his old friend’s little infamy and wagered that, 
enormous as Invictus’ prick might be, he could calmly down three bottles of wine while lying embuggered upon it. What effortlessness, what ease, 
what detachment in libertinage! He won what he had staked, and as they 
were not drunk on an empty stomach, as those three bottles fell upon at 
least fiftee n others, the Duc’s head began gently to swim. The first 
object upon which his eye alighted was his wife, weeping over the abuse 
she had sustained from Hercule, and this sight so inspired the Duc he lost not an instant doing to her things too excessive for  us to describe as 
yet. The reader will notice how hampered we are in these beginnings, and how stumbling are our efforts to give a coherent account of these 
matters; we trust he will forgive us for leaving the curtain drawn over a 
considerable number of l ittle details. We promise it will be raised later 
on. Our champions finally made their way into the salon, where new 
pleasures and further delights were awaiting them. Coffee and liqueurs 
were distributed by a charming quartet made up of Adonis and 
Hyacint he, two appealing little boys, and two pretty maids, Zelmire and 
Fanny. Thérèse, one of the duennas, supervised them, for it was decreed 
that wherever two or more children were gathered, a duenna was to be 
on hand. Our four libertines, half- drunk but none the less resolved to 
abide by their laws, contented themselves with kisses, fingerings, but 
their libertine intelligence knew how to season these mild activities with 
all the refinements of debauch and lubricity. It was thought for a moment that the Bishop  was going to have to surrender his fuck in 
exchange for the extraordinary things he was wringing from Hyacinthe, while Zelmire frigged him. His nerves were already aquiver, an impending crisis was beginning to take possession of his entire being, 
but he c hecked himself, the tempting objects ready to triumph over his 
senses were sent spinning and, knowing there was yet a full day’s work 
ahead of him, the Bishop saved his best for the evening. Six different 
kinds of liqueur were drunk, three kinds of coffee,  and the hour 
sounding at last, the two couples withdrew to dress.  
Our friends took a fifteen minute nap, then moved into the throne 
room, the place where the auditors were to listen to the narrations. The 
friends took their places upon their couches, the Duc having his beloved 
Hercule at his feet, near him, naked, Adelaide, Durcet’s wife and the 
Président’s daughter, and for quatrain opposite him, and linked to his 
niche by a chain of flowers, as has been explained, Zéphyr, Giton, 
Augustine, and Sophie cos tumed as shepherds, supervised by Louison as 
an old peasant woman playing the role of their mother.  At Curval’s feet was Invictus, upon his couch lay Constance, the 
Duc’s wife and Durcet’s daughter, and for quatrain four little Spaniards, 
each sex dressed in its costume and as elegantly as possible: they were 
Adonis, Céladon, Fanny, and Zelmire; Fanchon, clad as a duenna, watched over them.  
The Bishop had Antinoüs at his feet, his niece Julie on his couch, and 
four little almost naked savages for quatrain. The boys: Cupidon and Narcisse; the girls: Hébé and Rosette; an old Amazon, interpreted by 
Thérèse, was in charge of them.  
Durcet had Bum -Cleaver for fucker, near him reclined Aline, 
daughter of the Bishop, and in front of him were four little sultanas, th e 
boys being dressed as girls, and this refinement to the last degree 
emphasized the enchanting visages of Zélamir, Hyacinthe, Colombe, and Michette. An old Arab slave, portrayed by Marie, presided over this 
quatrain.  
The three storytellers, magnificently dressed as upper -class Parisian 
courtesans, were seated below the throne upon a couch, and Madame Duclos, the month’s narrator, in very scanty and very elegant attire, well 
rouged and heavily bejeweled, having taken her place on the stage, thus 
began the s tory of what had occurred in her life, into which account she 
was, with all pertinent details, to insert the first one hundred and fifty passions designated by the title of simple passions : 
’Tis no slight undertaking, Messieurs, to attempt to express onese lf before a 
circle such as yours. Accustomed to all of the most subtle and most delicate that 
letters produce, how, one may wonder, will you be able to bear the ill -shaped 
periods and uncouth images of a humble creature like myself who has received 
no othe r education than the one supplied her by libertinage. But your indulgence reassures me; you ask for naught but the natural and true, and I 
dare say what of these I shall provide you will merit your attention . 
My mother was twenty -five when she brought me into the world, and I 
was her second child; the first was also a daughter, by six years my elder. My mother’s birth was not distinguished. She had been early bereft of both her 
father and mother, and as her parents had dwelled near the Récollet monastery 
in Paris, when she found herself an orphan, abandoned and without any 
resources, she obtained permission from these good fathers to come and ask for 
alms in their church. But as she had some youth and health, she soon attracted 
their notice, and gradually mo unted from the church below to the rooms above, 
whence she soon descended with child. It was as a consequence of one such 
adventure my sister saw the light, and it is more than likely that my own 
birth might rightly be ascribed to no other cause . 
However, content with my mother’s docility and seeing how she did make 
the community to prosper and flourish, the good fathers rewarded her works by granting her what might be earned from the rental of seats in their church; my mother no sooner obtained this post t han, with her superiors’ leave, she 
married one of the house’s water carriers who straightway, without the least 
repugnance, adop ted my sister and me . 
Born into the Church, I dwelled so to speak more in the House of God than 
in our own; I helped my mother arrange the chairs, I seconded the sacristans in 
their various operations, I would have said Mass had that been necessary, although I had not yet attained my fifth year . 
One day, returning from my holy occupations, my sister asked me whether I 
had yet enco untered Father Laurent …. 
I said I had not . 
“Well, look out,” said she, “he’s on the watch for you, I know he is, he wants 
to show you what he showed me. Don’t run away, look him straight in the eye without being afraid, he won’t touch you, but he’ll show y ou something very 
funny, and if you let him do it he’ll pay you a lot. There are more than fifteen 
of us around here whom he’s shown it to. That’s what he likes best, and he’s 
given a present to us all.”  
You may well imagine, Messieurs, that nothing more w as needed, not only 
to keep me from fleeing Father Laurent, but to induce me to seek him out; at that age the voice of modesty is a whisper at best, and its silence until the time one has left the tutelage of Nature is certain proof, is it not, that this f actitious 
sentiment is far less the product of that original mother’s training than it is the fruit of education? I flew instantly to the church, and as I was crossing a little court located between the entrance of the churchyard and the monastery, I 
bumpe d squarely into Father Laurent. He was a monk of about forty, with a 
very handsome face. He stopped me.  
“Whither are you going, Françon?” he asked . 
“To arrange the chairs, Father .” 
“Never fear, never fear, your mother will attend to them,” said he. “Come, 
come along with me,” and he drew me toward a sequestered chamber hard by 
the place. “I am going to show you something you have never seen.”  
I follow him, we enter, he shuts the door and, having posted me directly 
opposite him : 
“Well, Françon,” says he, pul ling a monstrous prick from his drawers, an 
instrument which nearly toppled me with fright; “tell me,” he continues, 
frigging himself, “have you ever seen anything to equal it? …that’s what they 
call a prick, my little one, yes, a prick …it’s used for fuckin g, and what you’re 
going to see, what’s going to flow out of it in a moment or two, is the seed 
wherefrom you were created. I’ve shown it to your sister, I’ve shown it to all 
the little girls of your age, lend a hand, help it along, help get it out, do as your 
sister does, she’s got it out of me twenty times and more …. I show them my prick, and then what do you suppose I do? I squirt the fuck in their face …. 
That’s my passion, my child, I have no other …and you’re about to behold it.”  
And at the same time I felt myself completely drenched in a white spray, it 
soaked me from head to foot, some drops of it had leapt even into my eyes, for 
my little head just came to the height of his fly. However, Laurent was 
gesticulating. “Ah! the pretty fuck, the dear fuck I  am losing,” he cried, “why, 
look at you! You’re covered with it.” And gradually regaining control of 
himself, he calmly put his tool away and decamped, slipping twelve  sous into 
my hand and suggesting that I bring him any little companions I might happen to have . 
As you may readily fancy, I could not have been more eager to run and tell 
everything to my sister; she wiped me dry, taking the greatest care to overlook none of the spots, and she who had enabled me to earn my little fortune did not fail to dema nd half of my wages. Instructed by this example, I did not fail, in 
the hope of a similar division of the spoils, to round up as many little girls for Father Laurent as I could find. But having brought him one with whom he was already familiar, he turned h er away, the while giving me three  sous by 
way of encouragement . 
“I never see the same one twice, my child,” he told me, “bring me some I 
don’t know, never any of those who say they’ve already had dealings with me.”  
I managed more successfully; in the space of three months, I introduced 
Father Laurent to more than twenty new girls, with whom, for the sake of his pleasure, he employed the identical proceedings he had with me. Together with 
the stipulation that they be strangers to him, there was another rela tive to age, 
and it appeared to be of infinite importance: he had no use for anything 
younger than four or older than seven. And my little fortune could not have 
been faring better when my sister, noticing that I was encroaching upon her domain, threatened  to divulge everything to my mother if I did not put a stop 
to this splendid commerce; I had to give up Father Laurent . 
However, my functions continued to keep me in the neighborhood of the 
monastery; the same day I reached the age of seven I encountered a  new lover 
whose preferred caprice, although very childish, was nevertheless somewhat 
more serious. This one was named Father Louis, he was older than Laurent, 
and had some unidentifiable quality in his bearing that was a great deal more libertine. He sidled up to me at the door of the church as I was entering it, and 
made me promise to come up to his room. At first  I advanced a few objections, 
but once he had assured me that three years ago my sister had come for a visit 
and that he received little girls o f my age every day, I went with him. Scarcely 
were we in his cell when he closed and bolted the door and, having poured some elixir into a goblet, made me swallow it and then two more copious measures too. This preparatory step taken, the reverend, more af fectionate 
than his confrere, fell to kissing me and, chattering all the while, he untied my apron and, raising my skirt to my bodice, he laid hands, despite my faint strugglings, upon all the anterior parts he had just brought to light; and after 
having t horoughly fingered and considered them, he inquired of me whether I 
did not desire to piss. Singularly driven to this need by the strong dose he had a 
few moments earlier had me drink, I assured him the urge so to do was as powerful as ever it could be, bu t that I did not want to satisfy it in front of 
him. 
“Oh, my goodness, do! Why yes, my little rascal,” quoth the bawdy fellow, 
“by God yes, you’ll piss in my presence and, what’s worse, you’ll piss upon me. 
Here it is,” he went on, plucking his prick from his breeches, “here’s the tool 
you’re going to moisten, just piss on it a little.”  
And thereupon he lifted me up and set me on two chairs, one foot on one 
chair, the other foot on the other, he moved the chairs apart as far as was possible, then bade me sq uat. Holding me in this posture, he placed a container 
beneath me, established himself on a little stool about as high as the pot; his 
engine was in his hand, directly under my cunt. One of his hands supporting 
my haunches, he frigged himself with the othe r, and my mouth being at a level 
with his, he kissed it . 
“Off you go, my little one, piss,” cried he, “flood my prick with that 
enchanting liquid whose hot outpouring exerts such a sway over my senses. Piss, my heart, care not but to piss and try to inunda te my fuck.”  
Louis became animated, excited himself, it was easy to see that this unusual 
operation was the one which all his senses most cherished; the sweetest, gentlest ecstasy crowned that very moment when the liquids wherewith he had swollen 
my stomac h, gushed most abundantly out of me, and we simultaneously filled 
the same pot, he with fuck, I with urine. The exercise concluded, Louis 
delivered roughly the same speech to me I had heard from Laurent, he wished 
to make a procuress of his little whore, a nd this time, caring precious little for 
my sister’s threats, I boldly guided every child I knew to dear Louis. He had 
every one of them do the same thing, and as he experienced no compunction 
upon seeing any one of them a second or third time, and as he a lways gave me 
separate payment, which had nothing to do with the additional fee I extracted 
from my little comrades, before six months had passed I found myself with a tidy little sum which was entirely my own; I had only to conceal knowledge of 
it from my  sister. 
“Duclos,” the Président interrupted at this point, “we have, I believe, 
advised you that your narrations must be decorated with the most 
numerous and searching details; the precise way and extent to which we 
may judge how the passion you describe relates to human manners and 
man’s character is determined by your willingness to disguise no circumstance; and, what is more, the least circumstance is apt to have an immense influence upon the procuring of that kind of sensory irritation 
we expect from y our stories.”  
“Yes, my Lord,” Duclos replied, “I have been advised to omit no detail 
and to enter into the most minute particulars whenever they serve to shed light upon the human personality, or upon the species of passion; 
have I neglected something in c onnection with this one?”  
“You have,” said the Président; “I have not the faintest notion of your 
second monk’s prick, nor any idea of its discharge. In addition, did he 
frig your cunt, pray tell, and did he have you dandle his device? You see 
what I mean by neglected details.”  
“Your pardon, my Lord,” said Duclos, “I shall repair these present 
mistakes and avoid them in the future. Father Louis possessed a very ordinary member, greater in its length than it was around and in general of a most common shape a nd turn; indeed, I do recall that he stiffened 
rather poorly and that it was not until the crisis arrived he took on a little firmness. No, he did not frig my cunt, he was content to enlarge it with his fingers as much as possible, so as to give free issue  to the urine. He 
brought his prick very close two or three times, and his discharge was 
rapid, intense, and brief; nothing came from his mouth but the words: 
‘Ah, fuck! piss, my child, piss the pretty fountain, piss, d’ye hear, piss 
away, don’t you see me  come?’ And while saying that, he intermittently 
sprinkled kisses on my mouth. They were not excessively libertine.”  
“That’s it, Duclos,” said Durcet, “the Président was right; I could not 
visualize a thing on the basis of your first telling, but now I hav e your 
man well in view.”  
“One moment, Duclos,” said the Bishop, upon seeing that she was 
about to proceed. “I have on my own account a need rather more pressing than to piss, it’s had me in its grip for an age and I have the 
feeling it’s got to go.”  
So sa ying he drew Narcisse to his alcove. Fire leapt from the prelate’s 
eyes, his prick stood up against his belly, foam flecked his lips, it was confined fuck that wished absolutely to escape and which could not be 
liberated save by violent means. He dragged h is niece and the little boy 
into his closet. Everything came to a pause; a discharge was regarded as 
something far too portentous not to suspend everything the moment 
someone was about to produce one; all was to concur to make it 
delicious. But upon this occasion Nature’s will did not correspond with the Bishop’s wishes, and several minutes after having retired to the 
closet, he emerged from it, furious, in the same state of erection and, 
addressing himself to Durcet, presiding officer for November:  
“Put th at odd little fellow down for some punishment on Saturday,” 
he said, flinging the child ten feet away from him, “and make it severe, if you please.”  
It was apparent that the boy had not been able to satisfy Monseigneur, 
and Julie whispered in her father’s ear what had happened.  
“Well, by God, then take another,” cried the Duc, “choose something 
from one of our quatrains if nothing in yours suits you.”  
“Ah, my satisfaction now would be far beyond the damned little that 
would have been sufficient a moment ago,” said the prelate. “You know to what we are led by a thwarted desire; I’d prefer to restrain myself, but 
no undue leniency with that poor little fool,” he continued, “that’s what I 
recommend ….” 
“But be at ease, my dear Bishop,” said Durcet, “I promise you he’ll get 
a good scolding, ’tis a fine idea to provide the others with an example. I’m sorry to see you in such a state; try something else; have yourself 
fucked.”  
“Monseigneur,” spoke up Martaine, “I feel myself greatly disposed to 
satisfy you, were You r Excellency to wish it ….” 
“No, no, Christ, no!” the Bishop cried, “don’t you know that there are 
a thousand occasions when one does not want a woman’s asshole? I’ll wait, I’ll wait …let Duclos continue, I’ll get rid of it tonight, I’ll have to 
find the one  I want. Proceed, Duclos.”  
And the friends having laughed right heartily at the Bishop’s libertine 
frankness —“there are a thousand occasions when one does not want a 
woman’s asshole” —the storyteller resumed in these terms:  
It was not long after I had attai ned the age of seven that one day, following 
my custom of bringing one of my little comrades to Louis, I found another monk with him in his cell. As that had never happened before, I was surprised 
and wanted to leave, but Louis having reassured us, my litt le friend and I 
went boldly in.  
“Well there, Geoffrey,” Louis said to his companion, pushing me toward 
him, “did I not tell you that she was nice?”  
“Why yes indeed, she is,” said Geoffrey, taking me upon his knees and giving 
me a kiss. “How old are you, my  little one?”  
“Seven, Father.”  
“Just fifty years younger than I,” said the good father, kissing me anew . 
And during this little dialogue, the sirup was being prepared and, as was 
customary, each of us swallowed three big glasses of it, but, as it was not 
customary for me to drink when I brought Louis a toy, because he only expected 
a sprinkling from the girl I brought, because I did not usually stay for the 
ceremony but used to leave at once, for all these reasons I was astonished by 
their actions, and in a  tone of the most naive innocence I inquired : “And why do you have me drink, good Father? do you want me to piss? ” 
“To be sure, we do, my child,” quoth Geoffrey, who still had me squeezed 
between his thighs and whose hands were already straying over my fro nt, “yes, 
you’re to piss, and the adventure is to take place with me; it will be, perhaps, a 
little different from the other one you experienced here. Come into my cell, let’s 
leave Father Louis with your little friend, and let’s get to business ourselves;  
we’ll return when all our needs are satisfied.”  
We left; before going, Louis told me in a whisper to be very obliging with 
his friend, and said I’d not regret it if I were. Geoffrey’s cell was not far from 
Louis’, and we reached it without being seen. No sooner inside than Geoffrey, having barricaded the door, told me to get rid of my skirts. I obeyed, he himself 
pulled my shift above my navel and, having seated me on the edge of his bed, 
he spread my thighs as wide as it were possible, at the same time th rusting me 
back in such a way my belly came into full view and my weight rested entirely 
upon the base of my spine. He besought me to keep in that position and to 
begin to piss immediately he gave one of my thighs a little slap with his hand. Then, scrutin izing me for a moment in this attitude, with one hand he 
separated the lips of my cunt, with the other he unbuttoned his breeches and 
with quick and energetic movements began to shake a dark, stunted little 
member which seemed not much inclined to respond to what was required of 
it. To give it some encouragement, our man set about doing his duty and 
proceeded to his chosen custom, the one which procured him the greatest possible 
titillation —down he went on his knees, I say, between my legs, spent another 
instant peering into the little orifice I presented to his eye, several times 
applied his mouth to it, between his teeth muttering certain luxurious phrases 
I cannot remember because at the time I did not understand them, and 
continued to agitate that sullen little member, which, though fearfully bullied, 
did not budge. Finally, he sealed his lips to those of my cunt, I received the signal, and instantly draining what my bladder contained into the 
gentleman’s mouth, I flooded him with a stream of urine he swa llowed as fast 
as I launched it into his gullet. Whereupon his member unfurled, and its proudly lifted head throbbed against one of my thighs: I felt it bravely spray his debilitated manhood’s sterile issue. Everything had been so well managed 
he swallowed  the final drops at the same moment his prick, confused by his 
victory, wept bloody tears over it. Trembling in every limb, Geoffrey got to his 
feet, and I observed that he no longer had for his idol, once the incense had 
been extinguished, the same religi ous fervor he had while delirium, inflaming 
his homage, still sustained its glory: he rather abruptly gave me twelve sous, 
opened the door without asking me, as had the others, to bring him girls (he 
was evidently furnished by someone else) and, pointing t he way to his friend’s 
cell, told me to go there, said that he was in a hurry, that he had his offices to 
perform, that he could not conduct me himself, and then shut his door without 
affording me the chance to answer him . 
“Oh yes indeed!” said the Duc, “u nnumbered are they who absolutely 
cannot bear the instant when the illusion is shattered. It seems as if one’s pride suffers when one lets a woman see one in such a state of feebleness, 
and disgust would appear to be the result of the discomfiture one 
experiences at such moments.”  
“No,” said Curval, whom Adonis, kneeling, was frigging, and whose 
hands were wandering over Zelmire, “no, my friend, pride has nothing to do with it, but the object which is in the profoundest sense devoid of 
all value save the on e our lust endows it with, that object, I say, shows 
itself for what in truth it is once our lubricity has subsided. The more 
violent has been the irritation, the more this object is stripped of its 
attraction when this irritation ceases to sustain it, jus t as we are more or 
less fatigued after greater or lesser exertion, and this aversion we thereupon sense is nothing but the sentiment of a glutted soul 
whereunto happiness is displeasing because happiness has just wearied 
it.” 
“But from this aversion, all the same,” spoke up Durcet, “is often born 
a plan for revenge, whose fatal consequences have often been observed.”  
“Yes, but that’s another matter,” Curval replied, “and as the aftermath 
of these recitals will perhaps afford us examples of what you’re saying, 
let’s not anticipate through dissertations what will be naturally produced 
of itself.”  
“Président, be frank,” said Durcet: “on the verge of running amuck 
yourself, I believe that at the present moment you prefer to prepare 
yourself to feel how one enjoys than to discuss how one becomes 
disgusted.”  
“Why, not at all, not a bit of it,” said Curval, “I am as cool as ice …. 
To be sure, yes,” he continued, kissing Adonis’ lips, “this child is charming …but he’s not to be fucked; I know of nothing worse than your 
damnable regulations …one must reduce oneself to things …to 
things …Go on, Duclos, go on, continue, for I have the feeling I might 
perpetrate something foolish, and I want my illusion to remain intact at 
least until I go to bed.”  
The Président, perceiving h is engine beginning to rebel, sent the two 
children back to their posts and, lying down beside Constance, who, pretty as she was, doubtless failed to stimulate him as much, he a second 
time besought Duclos to resume her story; she did at once, as follows:  
I rejoined my little comrade. Louis had been serviced; not very well pleased, 
we both left the monastery, I almost resolved not to return again. Geoffrey’s tone had wounded my little pride, and without probing further to determine 
the origins of my displea sure, I liked neither its apparent cause nor its consequences. However, it had been written in my destiny that I was to have 
yet a few more adventures in that pious retreat, and the example of my sister, 
who had, so she told me, done business with fourteen  of its inhabitants, was to 
convince me that I was still far from the end of my tour. Three months after 
this last episode, I became aware of overtures being made to me by another one 
of these reverend fathers, this one a man of about sixty. He invented ev ery 
kind of ruse to lure me to his room; one of them succeeded, so well in fact that 
one fine Sunday morning I found myself there, without knowing why or how 
it had happened. The old rascal, known as Father Henri, shut and locked the 
door as soon as I had crossed the threshold, and embraced me with exceeding warmth . 
“Ah, little imp!” cried he, transported with joy, “I’ve got you now, you’ll not 
escape me this time, ha!”  
The weather was extremely cold at the time, my little nose was running as 
children’s usu ally do in the winter; I drew out a handkerchief . 
“What’s this? What’s this? Be careful there,” warned Henri, “I’m the one 
who’ll attend to that operation, my sweet.”  
And having stretched me out upon his bed with my head a little to one side, 
he sat down n ext to me and raised my head upon his lap. He peered avidly at 
me, his eyes seemed ready to devour the secretion oozing from my nose. “Oh, the 
pretty little snotface,”  said he, beginning to pant, “how I’m going to suck her.” 
Therewith bending down over me,  and taking my nose in his mouth, not only 
did he devour all the mucus between my nose and mouth, but he even lewdly darted the tip of his tongue into each of my nostrils, one after the other, and 
with such cleverness he provoked two or three sneezes which  redoubled the flow 
he desired and was consuming so hungrily. But ask me for no details bearing 
upon this fellow, Messieurs, nothing appeared, and whether because he did 
nothing, or because he did it all in his drawers, there was nothing to be seen, and am idst the multitude of his kisses and lecherous lickings there was nothing 
outstanding which might have denoted an ecstasy, and consequently it is my 
opinion that he did not discharge. All my clothes were in place, even his hands 
stayed still, and I give yo u my word that this old libertine’s fantasy might be 
performed upon the world’s most respectable and least initiated girl without 
her being able to suppose there was anything lewd in it at all . 
But the same could not be said of the one that chance presented to my 
consideration the same day I turned nine years old. Father Etienne, that was 
the libertine’s name, had several times asked my sister to bring me to him, and 
she had got me to promise to go alone, for she was unwilling to accompany me, fearing lest my mother, who already scented something in the wind, might 
find out; well, I was planning to pay him a visit when, one day, I ran directly 
into him in a corner of the church, near the sacristy. His manner was so gracious, he argued so persuasively that he  had no need to drag me away by 
main force. Father Etienne was about forty, a healthy, robust, strapping fellow. We were no sooner closeted together than he asked whether I knew how to frig a prick . 
“Alas!” said I, blushing to the ears, “I don’t even know what you’re talking 
about.”  
“Well then I’ll explain, my chit,” said he, bestowing heartfelt kisses upon my 
mouth and eyes, “my unique pleasure in this world is to educate little girls, and the lessons I give are so excellent they prove unforgettable. Begin  by removing 
your skirts, for if I am to teach you how you must proceed in order to give me 
pleasure, ’tis only fair that at the same time I teach you what to do in order to 
receive it, and that lesson cannot be a success if anything hinders us. Here we 
go. We shall begin with you. What you behold down here,” said he, placing his 
hand on my mound, “is called a cunt, and this is what you must do in order to awaken very felicitous sensations in it. With one finger —one will do —lightly 
rub this little protubera nce you feel here. It, by the way, is called the clitoris.”  
I followed instructions . 
“There, you see, that way, my little one, while one hand is busy there, let 
one finger of your other hand gradually work its way into this delicious 
crack….” 
He adjusted m y hands . 
“That’s the way, yes …Well! Don’t you feel anything?” he asked, keeping me 
to my task.  
“No, Father, I truly don’t,” I answered most naively . 
“Ah, that’s because you are still too young, but two years from now you’ll see 
the pleasure it gives.”  
“Wai t,” I interrupted, “I think something’s happening.”  
And with all imaginable vigor I rubbed the places he had pointed out …. 
Yes, sure enough, a few faint titillations convinced me that what I’d begun 
was worth continuing, and the extensive use I have made e ver since of this 
relief -providing exercise has more than once persuaded me of my master’s 
competence . 
“And now ’tis  my turn,” said Etienne, “for your pleasures arouse my desires, 
and I simply must share them, my angel. Here we are; take this,” he said, 
inviting me to grip a tool so monstrous my two little hands were scarce able to 
close around it, “take this, my child, ’tis  called a prick, and this movement 
here,” he went on, guiding my wrist in rapid jerks, “this action is called frigging. Thus, by means of this action you frig my prick. Go to it, my child, 
put all your strength into it. The more rapid and persistent your movements, 
the more you will hasten a moment which, believe me, I cherish. But bear one 
essential thing in mind,” he added, all the while directing my flying hands, “be 
careful at all times to keep the tip uncovered. Never allow this skin, we call it the prepuce, to cover it over; were this prepuce to happen to cover this part, 
which we call the glans, all my pleasure would vanish. That’s it; we’re shortly 
going to see something, my little one,” my teacher continued, “watch me do on you what you did on me.” 
And pressing himself against my chest as he spoke and as I kept in motion, 
he placed his hands so adroitly, he wriggled his fingers wit h such high art that 
pleasure rose at last to grip me, and it is without a shadow of a doubt to him I owe my initiation. And then, my head reeling, I abandoned my task, and the 
reverend, not yet ready to complete it, consented to forget his pleasure for a 
moment in order to devote himself exclusively to cultivating mine; and when he had caused me to taste it all, he had me resume the work my ecstasy had 
obliged me to interrupt, and very expressly enjoined me to keep my mind 
strictly on what I was about and to care for naught but him. I did so with all 
my soul. It was only just: I surely owed him my thanks. I went so merrily to 
work, and I observed all his instructions so faithfully that the monster, 
vanquished by such rapid vibrations, finally spewed forth a ll its rage and 
covered me with its venom. Thereupon Etienne seemed to go out of his mind, 
borne aloft in the most voluptuous delirium; ardently he kissed my mouth, he 
fondled and frigged my cunt, and the wildness in his speech still more 
emphatically decl ared his disorder. Gross expressions, mingling with others of 
the most endearing sort, characterized this transport, which lasted quite a 
while, and whence at last the gallant Etienne, so unlike his piss -swallowing 
colleague, emerged to tell me that I was charming, that he greatly hoped I 
would come back to see him, and that he would treat me every time as he was 
going to now: pressing a silver coin into my hand, he conducted me back to the 
place he had brought me from and left me wonderstruck, thrilled and  
enchanted with this latest good fortune. Feeling much better about the 
monastery, I decided to return to it often in the future, persuaded that the more I advanced in age, the more agreeable adventures I would meet with there. 
But destiny called me elsewh ere; more important events awaited me in a new 
world, and upon returning to my house I learned news which was soon to sober the elation produced in me by the happy outcome of my latest experience.  
Here a bell was heard struck in the salon; it announced sup per. 
Whereupon Duclos, generally applauded for the auspicious little beginnings she had made, descended from the stage, and, after having made a few adjustments to repair the disorder all four of them seemed to 
be in, the friends turned their thoughts to n ew pleasures and hastened to 
find out what Comus held in store for them.  
This meal was to be served by the eight little girls, naked. Having 
been wise enough to leave the auditorium a few minutes early, they 
stood ready the moment the masters entered these  fresh surroundings. 
The table companions were to be twenty in number: the libertine 
quartet, the eight fuckers, the eight little boys. But, still furious with 
Narcisse, the Bishop wished to veto his presence at the banquet, and as it was perfectly natural  that they make allowances for one another’s whims 
and observe a mutual tolerance, no one raised his voice to contest the 
sentence, and the poor little simpleton was confined alone in a dark closet to await that stage in the orgies when perhaps Monseigneur  might 
be inclined to make friends with him again. The wives and the storytellers, dining apart, had concluded their meal in great haste in order to be ready for the orgies, the elders directed the movements of the 
eight little girls, and dinner was begun.  
This meal, much heavier than the one which had been eaten earlier in 
the day, was served with far greater opulence and splendor. It began with a shellfish soup and hors d’oeuvres composed of twenty dishes; twenty 
entrees came on next, and soon gave way to  another twenty lighter entrees made up entirely of breasts of chicken, of assorted game prepared 
in every possible way. This was offset by a serving of roasts; everything of 
the rarest imaginable was brought on. Next arrived some cold pastry, 
soon afterwa rd twenty -six entremets of every description and form. The 
table was cleared, and what had just been removed was replaced by a 
whole array of cold and hot sugared pastries. Dessert finally appeared: a 
prodigious number and variety of fruits, though the sea son was winter, 
then ices, chocolate, and the liqueurs which were taken at table. As for 
the wines, they varied with each service: Burgundy accompanied the 
first; two kinds of Italian wine came with the second and third; Rhine wine with the fourth; with th e fifth, Rhône wines; sparkling champagne 
with the sixth; two kinds of Greek wine with the other two courses. Spirits were prodigiously roused, for, as distinct from lunch, one was not granted permission during dinner to take the waitresses to task, or wit h 
that same severity; these creatures, being the very quintessence of what the company had to offer, had to be treated rather more sparingly but, on the other hand, the friends indulged in a furious round of impurities 
with them.  
Half-drunk, the Duc said h e would not touch another drop, from now 
on it was Zelmire’s urine or nothing, and he drained two large glasses of it which he obtained by having the child climb upon the table and squat 
over his plate. “Why, there’s nothing to drinking weak young piss,” s aid 
Curval and, calling Fanchon to him: “Come hither, venerable bitch, I’d 
slake my thirst at the very source.” And thrusting his head between the 
old crone’s legs, he greedily sucked up the impure floods of poisonous 
urine she darted into his stomach. And  now their words grew heated, 
they argued various philosophical problems and considered several 
questions relating to manners; I leave it to the reader to imagine the purity of those discourses and the loftiness of their moralizing. The Duc 
undertook an encomium of libertinage, and proved that it was natural, 
and that the more numerous were its extravagances, the better they 
served the creator of us all. His opinion was generally acclaimed, enthusiastically applauded, and they rose to go and put into practice the 
doctrines which had just been established. Everything was ready in the 
orgy salon: the women were there, already naked, lying upon piles of pillows on the floor, strewn promiscuously amongst the young catamites 
who had hastened away from table a lit tle after dessert. Our friends 
reeled in; two elders undressed them, and they fell upon the flock like 
wolves assailing a sheepfold. The Bishop, whose passions had been 
cruelly irritated by the obstacles they had encountered of late, laid hands 
on Antinoüs ’ sublime ass while Hercule skewered him, and vanquished 
by this latest sensation and by the important and doubtless so much 
desired service Antinoüs was rendering him, he finally spat out streams 
of semen so hard driven and so pungent he swooned in ecstas y. Bacchus’ 
wiles had spellbound senses glutted from excess, numbed from luxury; 
our hero passed from his faint to a sleep so profound he had to be carried 
to his bed. The Duc was having a marvelous time. Curval, recollecting 
what Martaine had offered the Bishop, stuffed her while he got his own 
ass stoppered. A thousand other horrors, a thousand other infamies 
accompanied and succeeded those, and our three indomitable champions —for the Bishop no longer was of this world —our valorous 
athletes, I say, escort ed by the four night -toiling fuckers who had not 
been at the revels but who now came to fetch them, retired with the 
same wives who had shared their couches during story time. Luckless 
victims of their brutality, upon whom it is only too likely they shower ed more outrages than caresses and who, it is equally probable, inspired in 
them more disgust than pleasure …. 
Such were the events that transpired on the first day.    
THE SECOND DAY  
The company rose at the customary hour. The Bishop, entirely 
recovered from his excesses, and who, waking at four in the morning, was deeply shocked to find they had let him go to bed unaccompanied, 
had summoned Julie and his fucker for the night to come and occupy 
their posts. They answered the call instantly, and in their arm s the 
libertine plunged back into the thick of new impurities.  
When, in keeping with regulations, breakfast had been taken in the 
girls’ quarters, Durcet went on his rounds, and, notwithstanding all the 
arguments he heard, further delinquencies appeared to  his eyes. 
Michette was guilty of one kind of fault and Augustine, whom Curval 
had ordered to keep herself throughout the day in a certain state, was 
found in the absolutely opposite state; she declared she had forgotten, 
made a hundred apologies, and prom ised it would not happen again, but 
the quadrumvirate was inexorable, and both names were inscribed on the 
list of punishments to be executed come the first Saturday.  
Highly dissatisfied with all these little girls’ ineptness in the art of 
masturbation, annoyed by the effects of this awkwardness with which he 
had been obliged to put up the previous evening, Durcet proposed that 
one hour in the morning be set aside for giving them lessons, and that 
the friends take turns rising an hour early, the exercise period being set 
from nine until ten— one friend would rise at nine every morning, I say, 
to participate in the training. It was decided that the supervisor would be seated comfortably in a chair in the middle of the harem and that each 
little girl, led forth  and guided by Duclos, the best frigger in the castle, 
would demonstrate upon the friend, would direct the little girl’s hand, her motion, would explain the intricacies of tempo, how much and how 
little speed was required and how that depended on the patie nt’s 
condition, would also explain what attitudes and postures were most conducive to the operation’s success; furthermore, punishments were fixed for her who at the end of a fortnight, despite the lessons, should 
fail of perfect proficiency in this art. I t was emphasized to the little girls 
that, pursuant to the good ecclesiastic’s doctrines, the glans was to be 
kept uncovered at all times, and that the hand not in action was 
meanwhile continually to be employed exciting the adjacent areas, this in 
keeping  with the particular fancy of the patient.  
The financier’s proposal pleased everyone; Duclos was informed, she 
accepted her appointment, and that same day she set up a frigging dummy upon which, in their spare time, the little girls could exercise their wr ists and maintain the necessary degrees of agility and suppleness. 
Hercule was given the same instructorship in the boys’ chamber; they being, as always, more skilled in this technique than the girls, because in the case of boys it is merely a question of doing for others what they do 
unto themselves, a week was ample time to turn them into the most 
delicious corps of friggers you could ever hope to meet with. On this 
particular morning, not one of them was found at fault, and Narcisse’s 
behavior of the pre vious day having brought about the refusal of all 
permissions, the chapel was empty save for Duclos, a pair of fuckers, 
Julie, Thérèse, Cupidon, and Zelmire. Curval was stiff as a ramrod, 
Adonis had inspired an astonishingly high temperature in him when, 
that morning, he had visited the boys, and it was generally thought he 
would erupt while watching Thérèse and the two fuckers manage their 
affairs; but he kept a grip upon himself.  The midday meal was the usual affair, but the dear Président, having 
drunk a  singular amount and frolicked about even more while eating, 
became inflamed all over again when coffee was served by Augustine and 
Michette, Zélamir and Cupidon, directed by old Fanchon, whom out of whimsy they had commanded to be as naked as the children . From this 
contrast Curval’s new lubricious furor was born, and he gave himself over to some choice extravagances at the expense of Zélamir and the duenna; this riotous conduct finally cost him his fuck.  
The Duc, pike aloft, closed in upon Augustine; he b rayed, he swore, 
he waxed unreasonable, and the poor little thing, all atremble, retreated like a dove before the bird of prey ready to pounce upon it. He limited 
himself, however, to a few libertine kisses, and was content to give her 
an introductory less on in advance of the ones she was to begin the 
following morning. The two others, less animated, having already started 
their naps, our two champions imitated them, and the quartet did not 
wake until six o’clock, the hour when the storytelling began in the  throne 
room.  
All the previous day’s quatrains had been altered with respect to both 
subjects and dress, and our friends had these couch companions: the Duc shared his niche with Aline, the Bishop’s daughter and consequently his 
own niece; beside the Bishop lay his sister -in-law, Constance, the Duc’s 
wife and Durcet’s daughter; Durcet was with Julie, the Duc’s daughter, 
the Président’s wife; that he might be roused from sleep and roused to more, Curval had with him Adelaide, Durcet’s wife, one of the creatures 
in this world it gave him the greatest pleasure to tease because of her 
virtue and her piety. He opened up with a few scurrile jests and low 
pranks, and having ordered her throughout the séance to maintain a 
posture that sorted well with his tastes, bu t which the poor woman found very tiresome to maintain, he threatened her with all his anger 
might produce were she to budge or give him a moment’s inconvenience. 
Everything being ready, Duclos ascended the platform and resumed her 
narration in this wise:  
Three days having elapsed since my mother had appeared at the house, her 
husband, far more uneasy about his belongings and his money than about her, took it into his head to enter her room, where it was their custom to hide their most precious possessions;  and what was his astonishment when, instead of 
what he was seeking, he found nothing but a note, written by my mother, advising him to make the best of his loss because, having decided to leave him 
forever, and having no money of her own, she had been forced to take all she 
had been able to make off with. As for the rest, he was to blame himself and his 
hard use of her for her departure and  for her having left him with two 
daughters who were, however, certainly worth as much as and possibly more 
than what she had removed. But the old gaffer was far from judging equal 
what now he had and what he had just lost, and the dismissal he graciously gave us, together with the request we not even sleep in the house that night, 
was convincing evidence some discrepancy  existed between his way of 
reckoning and my mother’s . 
Not much afflicted by a compliment which gave us full liberty to launch 
forth unimpeded into the little mode of life that was beginning to please us so 
much, my sister and I thought only to collect our  few belongings and to bid as 
swift a farewell to our dear stepfather as he had seen fit to bid us. Without the 
loss of a minute, we withdrew, and while waiting to decide how best to come 
to grips with our new destinies, we took lodgings in a small room in the 
neighborhood. Our first thoughts turned to what might be our mother’s fate 
and whereabouts; we had not the least doubt but that she had gone to the 
monastery, having decided to live secretly with some father, or that she was being kept somewhere in th e vicinity, and this was the opinion we held, 
without being unduly concerned, when a friar from the monastery brought us 
a note that bore out our conjectures. The substance of the note was that we 
would be very well advised, immediately night had fallen, t o come to the 
monastery and speak to the Father Superior, who was the note’s author; he 
would wait for us in the church until ten o’clock and would lead us to the place 
presently occupied by our mother, whose actual happiness and peace he would gladly have  us share. He very energetically urged us not to fail to come, and 
above all to conceal our movements with all possible care; for it was essential our stepfather know nothing of what was being done in behalf of both our mother and ourselves. My sister, fif teen years old at the time and hence more 
clever and more reasonable than I, who was but nine, after having dismissed the bearer of the letter and given him the reply that she would ponder its contents, admitted she found all these maneuvers very peculiar indeed . 
“Françon,” says she, “let’s not go. There’s something wrong with it. If this 
were an honest proposal, why wouldn’t Mother have either added a few words or made some kind of sign. Father Adrien, her best friend, left there almost 
three years ago, an d since then she’s only dropped in at the monastery while 
passing by, and hasn’t had any other regular intrigue there. What would have 
led her to choose this place for hiding? The Father Superior isn’t her lover and never has been. I know, it’s true she ha s amused him two or three times, but 
he’s not the man to lose his head over a woman for that slender reason: he’s 
even more inconstant and brutal to women once his caprice is satisfied. And so 
why would he have taken such an interest in our mother? There’s  something 
queer about it, I tell you. I never liked that old Superior; he’s wicked and 
harsh, and he’s a brute. Once he got me into his room, there were three more of 
them there, and after what happened to me then I swore I’d never set foot in 
the place a gain. If you take my advice, you’ll leave all those nasty monks alone. There’s no reason why I shouldn’t tell you so now, Françon, I have an 
acquaintance, a good friend, I dare say; her name is Madame Guérin, I’ve 
been going to her place for the past two years, and in all that time not one 
week has gone by without her arranging something nice for me. But none of those six -penny fucks like the ones at the monastery; I get at least three crowns 
from every one. Here, there’s proof of it,” my sister continued, showing me a purse containing more than ten  louis, “you can see I’m able to make my own 
way in the world. Well, my advice to you is to do what I do. Guérin will take 
you on, I’m sure of it, she got a glimpse of you a week ago when she came to 
fetch me for a party, and she told me to make you a proposal, and she said that, young as you are, she’d always find some way of placing you. Do like me, I tell 
you, and we’ll be well off in no time. Now, that’s all I’ve got to say to you; I’ll 
pay your expenses for to night, but from then on don’t count on me, little sister. 
Each for himself in this world. That’s what I say. I’ve earned that money with 
my body and my fingers, do the same yourself. And if you have any qualms, go 
talk it over with the devil, but don’t com e looking for me; well, I’ve told you 
what I think, and I’ll tell you now that I’d sooner stick my tongue two feet out 
than give you even a glass of water for nothing. As for Mother, I don’t care 
what’s happened to her, as a matter of fact, even if it’s th e worst I’m perfectly 
delighted, and all I hope is that the whore is far enough away so I’ll never see 
her again for the rest of my life. I know all the things she did to prevent me 
from getting anywhere in the trade, and all the while she was giving me th at 
fine advice, the bitch was doing things three times worse. So, may the devil 
take her and above all not bring her back, that’s all I care.”  
Not having, to tell you the truth, a heart more tender, nor a soul much more 
generous than my sister’s, it was in  all good faith I echoed the invectives 
wherewith she pilloried that excellent mother, and thanking my sister for the 
helpful words she promised to speak in my behalf, I in my turn promised to follow her to this woman’s house and, once I had been adopted, to put an end 
to my reliance on her. As for refusing to go to the monastery, we were fully 
agreed . 
“If indeed she is happy, so much the better for her,” I commented, “and in 
that case we can look out for our own welfare without having to go and 
submit to the same fate. And if it is a trap they’re setting for us, we’ve got to 
avoid it.”  
Whereupon my sister embraced me . 
“Splendid,” said she, “I see you’re a good girl. Don’t worry, we’re going to 
make a fortune. I’m pretty, so are you; we’ll earn as much as we  want, my chit, 
but don’t become attached to anyone, remember that. One today, another 
tomorrow, you’ve got to be a whore, a whore in body and soul. As for myself,” 
she went on, “I’m one now, such as you see me, and there isn’t any confessional, or priest,  or counsel, or threat that could ruin things for me. By Jesus, I’d go 
show my ass on the sidewalk as calmly and coolly as I’d drink a glass of wine. Imitate me, Françon, be amenable and you can get anything out of men; the trade’s a little hard in the beg inning, but you’ll get along and things get better. 
So many men, so many tastes. At first you’ve got to expect it, one of them 
wants one thing, another wants something else. But that doesn’t matter, you’re 
there to please and give them service; the custome r is always right. It doesn’t 
take long, and then the money’s in your pocket.”  
I admit I was amazed to hear such wild remarks from a girl so young, who 
had always seemed to me so decent. But as my heart beat in harmony with the 
spirit of what she said, I l et her know at once that I was not only disposed to 
duplicate all her actions, but even prepared to go a great deal further if 
necessary. Delighted with me, she fell to embracing me again, and as it was 
growing late, we sent out for a chicken and some good  wine and  supped and 
slept together, having decided to present ourselves the very next morning at the establishment of Madame Guérin and to ask her to include us amongst her  
pensionnaires.  
It was during that supper my sister taught me all I still did not know about 
libertinage. She showed herself naked to me, and I can warrant that she was 
one of the prettiest creatures there was in Paris at the time: the fairest of skin, 
the most agreeable plumpness, yet the most supple and intriguing figure, the 
loveliest  blue eyes, and all the rest correspondingly fine. I also learned for how 
long Guérin had been promoting her interests, and with what great pleasure 
she procured her clients who, never tired of her, asked for her constantly. No 
sooner were we in bed than i t occurred to us we had managed very badly in 
failing to give the Father Superior a reply, for our negligence might annoy 
him, and while we remained in this quarter of town it was important to 
humor him at least. But what was to be done? Eleven o’clock had  struck; we 
resolved to let things take their course . 
The adventure probably meant a great deal to the Superior, we supposed, 
and hence it was not difficult to surmise that he was laboring more in his own behalf than in that of the alleged happiness he had  mentioned in his 
communication; at any rate, midnight had just sounded when we heard a soft 
knocking at our door. It was the Superior himself; he had been waiting for us, 
said he, since two in the afternoon, we should at least have given him a 
response, a nd, seating himself at our bedside, he informed us that our mother 
had decided to spend the rest of her days in a little secret apartment they had at 
the monastery and in which she was having the world’s most cheerful time, 
improved by the company of all t he house’s bigwigs who would drop in to 
spend half the day with her and with another young woman, our mother’s 
companion; it was simply up to us to come and increase the number, but, in 
that we were a little too young to stay on permanently, he would only contract 
us to a three -years’ stint, at the end of which he swore we would be granted our freedom and a thousand crowns apiece; he added that he had been charged 
by our mother to assure us that we would be doing her a great kindness were 
we to come to shar e her solitude . 
“Father,” my sister said most impudently, “we thank you for your proposal. 
But at our age we have no inclination to have ourselves locked up in a cloister 
in order to be whores for priests, we’ve had enough of that already.”  
The Superior re newed his arguments, he spoke with a heat and energy 
which illustrated his powerful desire to have the thing succeed; finally 
observing that it was destined to fail, he hurled himself almost in a fury upon 
my sister . 
“Very well, little whore,” he cried, “a t least satisfy me once again before I 
take my leave.”  
And unbuttoning his breeches, he got astride her; she offered no resistance, 
persuaded that by allowing him to have his way she’d be rid of him all the 
sooner. And the smutty fellow, pinning her betwee n his knees, began to 
brandish and then to abuse a tough and rather stout engine, advancing it to 
within a quarter of an inch of my sister’s face . 
“Pretty face,” he gasped, “pretty little whore’s face, how I’ll soak it in my 
fuck, by sweet Jesus!”  
And ther ewith the sluices opened, the sperm flew out, and the entirety of my 
sister’s face, especially her nose and mouth, were covered with evidence of our visitor’s libertinage, whose passion might not have been so cheaply satisfied had his design in coming to u s met with success. More complacent now, the 
man of God’s only thoughts were of escape; after having flung a crown upon the table and relit his lantern:  
“You are little fools, you are little tramps,” he told us. “You are ruining your 
chances in this world;  may Heaven punish your folly by causing you to fall on evil days, and may I have the pleasure of seeing you in misery; that would be 
my revenge, that is what I wish you.”  
My sister, busy wiping her face, paid him back his stupidities in kind, and, 
our door shutting behind the Superior, we spent the remainder of the night in peace.  
“You’ve just seen one of his favorite stunts,” said my sister. “He’s mad about 
discharging in girls’ faces. If he only confined himself to that…but the scoundrel has a good many other eccentricities, and some of them are so 
dangerous that I do indeed fear …” 
But my sister was sleepy, she dozed off without completing her sentence, and 
the morrow bringing fresh adventures with it, we gave no more thought to 
that one . 
We were up early; having prettied ourselves as much as possible, we set out 
for Madame Guérin’s. That heroine lived in the rue Soli, in a very neat 
ground -floor apartment she shared with six tall young ladies between the ages 
of sixteen and twenty -two, all in splendid hea lth, all very pretty. But, 
Messieurs, you will be so kind as to allow me to postpone giving their descriptions until the proper moment in my story arrives. Delighted by the 
project which brought my sister to her for a long stay, Madame Guérin greeted 
us cordially and with the greatest pleasure showed us our rooms . 
“Young as you may find this child to be,” my sister said as she introduced me, 
“she will serve you well, I guarantee it. She is mild -tempered, thoughtful, has 
a very good character, and the soul o f a thoroughgoing whore. You must have a 
number of old lechers amongst your acquaintances who are fond of children; 
well this is just what they’re looking for …put her to work.”  
Turning in my direction, Guérin asked me if I was willing to undertake 
anything . “Yes, Madame,” I answered with something of an indignant air, and it 
pleased her, “anything provided it pays.”  
We were introduced to our new companions, who already knew my sister 
very well and out of friendship for her promised to look after me. We all sat 
down to dine together, and such, in a few words, Messieurs, was how I became 
installed in my first brothel . 
I was not to remain long unemployed; that same evening, an old 
businessman arrived wrapped up in a cloak; Guérin selected him for my first 
custo mer and arranged the match . 
“Ah, this time,” said she to the old libertine, leading me forth, “if it’s still 
hairless you like them, Monsieur Duclos, you’ll be delighted with the article, or 
your money back. Not a hair on her body.”  
“Indeed,” said the old original, peering down at me, “it looks like a child, yes 
indeed. How old are you, little one?”  
“Nine, Monsieur.”  
“Nine years old! …Well, well! that’s how I like them, Madame Guérin, 
that’s how I like them, you know. I’d take them  even younger if you had an y 
around. Why, bless my soul, they’re ready as soon as they’re weaned.”  
And laughing good -naturedly at his remarks, Guérin withdrew, leaving us 
alone together. Then the old libertine came up and kissed me upon the mouth 
two or three times. With one of his hands guiding mine, he had me pull from 
his fly a little device that could not have been more limp; continuing to act 
more or less in silence, he untied my skirts, lay me upon the couch with my 
blouse raised high upon my chest, mounted astride my thighs wh ich he had 
separated as far as possible; with one hand he pried open my little cunt while 
with the other put all his strength into manipulating his meager machine. 
“Ah, pretty little bird,” he said as he agitated himself and emitted sighs of 
pleasure, “ah, how I’d tame you if I were still able to, but I can’t anymore. There’s no remedy for it, in four years’ time this bugger of a prick will have 
ceased to get stiff. Open up, open up, my dearest, spread your legs.” And finally 
after fifteen minutes of strugg le, I observed my man to sigh and pant with 
greater energy. A few oaths lent strength to his expression, and I felt the area 
surrounding my cunt inundated with the hot, scummy seed which the rascal, 
unable to shoot it inside, was attempting to tamp down wi th his fingertips . 
He had no sooner done so than he was gone like a flash of lightning, and I 
was still cleaning myself when my gallant passed out the door and into the 
street. And so it was I came, Messieurs, to be named Duclos; the tradition in 
this hous e was for each girl to adopt the name of her firstcomer. I obeyed the 
custom . 
“One moment there,” said the Duc. “I delayed interrupting you until 
you came to a pause; you are at one now. Would you provide further information upon two matters: first, have y ou ever had any news of your 
mother, have you ever discovered what became of her? Secondly, was there any cause for the antipathy you and your sister had for her, or would you say these feelings were naturally inculcate in you both? This 
relates to the pro blem of the human heart, and ’tis  upon that we are 
concentrating our major efforts.”  
“My Lord,” Duclos replied, “neither my sister nor I have ever heard 
the slightest word from that woman.”  
“Excellent,” said the Duc, “in that case it’s all very clear, woul dn’t you 
say so, Durcet?”  
“Incontestably,” answered the banker. “Not a shadow of a doubt, and 
you are very fortunate you did not put your foot in that one. Neither of 
you would ever have got out.”  
“’Tis incredible,” Curval commented, “what headway that man ia has 
made with the public.”  “Why, no; after all, there’s nothing more delicious,” the Bishop 
replied.  
“And the second point?” asked the Duc, addressing the storyteller.  
“As for the second point, my Lord, that is to say, as for the reason for 
our antipath y, I’m afraid I should be hard pressed to account for it, but it 
was so violent in our two hearts that we both made the avowal that we 
would in all probability and very easily have poisoned her had we not managed, as it turned out, to be rid of her by othe r means. Our aversion 
had reached the ultimate degree of intensity, and as nothing overt occurred to give rise to it, I should judge it most likely that this sentiment was inspired in us by Nature.”  
“What doubt of it can there be?” said the Duc. “It happen s every day 
that she implants the most violent inclination to commit what mortals call crimes, and had you poisoned her twenty times over, this act would 
never have been anything but the result of the penchant for crime Nature 
put in you, a penchant she wi shes to draw to your attention by endowing 
you with such a powerful hostility. It is madness to suppose one owes 
something to one’s mother. And upon what, then, would gratitude be 
based? is one to be thankful that she discharged when someone once 
fucked he r? That would suffice, to be sure. As for myself, I see therein 
naught but grounds for hatred and scorn. Does that mother of ours give us happiness in giving us life?…Hardly. She casts us into a world beset 
with dangers, and once in it, ’tis  for us to mana ge as best we can. I 
distinctly recall that, long ago, I had a mother who aroused in me much the same sentiments Duclos felt for hers: I abhorred her. As soon as I 
was in a position to do so, I dispatched her into the next world; may she 
roast there; never in my life have I tasted a keener delight than the one I 
knew when she closed her eyes for the last time.”  At this point dreadful sobs were heard to come from one of the 
quatrains. It proved to be the Duc’s; upon closer examination it was 
discovered that young Sophie had burst into tears. Provided with a heart 
unlike those villains’, their conversation had brought to mind the cherished memory of her who had given her life, and who had perished 
in an effort to protect her while she was being abducted; this cruel vision 
offered itself to her tender imagination, a flood of tears ensued.  
“Ah, by God, now !” said the Duc, “that’s splendid. It’s for mama 
you’re crying, is it, my little snotface? Come here, come along, let me comfort you.”  
And the libertine, warmed  by what had been happening, by these 
words of his, and by the effects they produced, displayed a thunderous prick which was apparently speeding toward a discharge. Marie, the quatrain’s duenna, led the child forward all the same. Her tears flowed 
abundant ly down her cheeks, the novice’s dress she was wearing that day 
seemed to lend yet more charm to the sorrow which embellished her 
looks: it were impossible for a creature to be lovelier.  
“By the Holy Bugger,” quoth the Duc, springing up like one gone out 
of his mind, “what a pretty mouthful we have here. I’m going to do what 
Duclos has just described …smear some fuck on her cunt …. Undress 
her.”  
And everyone silently awaited the issue of this little skirmish.  
“Oh! my Lord, my Lord!” cried Sophie, casting hers elf at the Duc’s 
feet, “at least respect my sorrow, I groan for my mother’s fate, she was dear to me, she died defending me, I shall never see her again. Have pity 
upon my tears, grant me this one evening of respite.”  
“Why, fuck my eyes!” the Duc exclaimed , fondling his heaven-
threatening prick, “I’d never have believed this scene could be so voluptuous. Off with her clothes, I tell you to take them off,” he roared 
at Marie, “she should already be naked.”  
And Aline, lying upon the Duc’s couch, shed warm tea rs, so did 
Adelaide, who was heard to utter a moan in Curval’s alcove; the latter, in no wise partaking of that lovely creature’s grief, violently scolded his 
playmate for having shifted from the position he had commanded her to 
keep, and, that done, turne d an appreciative gaze upon the delicious 
scene whose outcome interested him exceedingly.  
Sophie’s clothes are removed without the faintest regard for her 
feelings, she is placed in the posture Duclos has just described, the Duc announces that he is about to discharge. But how is the thing to be 
done? What Duclos has just related had been performed by a man 
virtually incapable of an erection, and he had been able to direct his flabby prick’s discharge wherever he wished. Such was not the case here: 
the thre atful head of the Duc’s engine had not the least inclination to 
lower the awful stare whereby it seemed bent on cowing heaven; it 
appeared necessary, so to speak, to place the child on high. No one knew 
what to do, and the more obstacles were encountered, the more the 
enraged Duc fumed and blasphemed. Desgranges finally came to the 
rescue; nothing that pertained to libertinage was unknown to that sage 
old dame. She caught up the child and set her so skillfully upon her 
knees that, whatever the stance the Du c might adopt, the end of his 
prick was sure to nudge her vagina. Two servants came up to hold 
Sophie’s legs, and had it been her deflowering hour, never might she 
have displayed the merchandise to better advantage. But there was yet 
more to attend to: a c lever hand was needed to cause the torrent to leap 
its banks and to direct the flood fairly to its destination. Blangis had no 
desire to entrust so important a matter to an untutored child.  “Take Julie,” Durcet suggested, “she’ll suit you; she’s beginning to frig 
like an angel.”  
“Bah,” muttered the Duc, “I know the clumsy bitch. And she knows 
her father. No, she’d be panic -stricken, she’d fumble it.”  
“Upon my soul, I do recommend a boy for the job,” said Curval; “why 
not Hercule? His wrist is like a whip.”  
“I won’t have anyone but Duclos,” the Duc answered, “she’s the best 
of our friggers, allow her to quit her post for a moment or two.”  
Duclos steps forward, beaming with pride to have been accorded so 
distinguished a preference. She rolls her sleeve to the elbow and grasps 
the nobleman’s enormous instrument, she sets to rattling that spear, 
keeps the foreskin snapped broadly back, she moves it with such art, she 
agitates it by means of strokes so swift and simultaneously so perfectly attuned to the state she  observes her patient to be in, that the bomb 
finally explodes upon the very hole it is to cover, inundating it. The Duc shrieks, swears, storms. Duclos is disconcerted not in the least, she gauges her movements by the degree of pleasure they produce. Anti noüs, 
properly situated for this function, delicately works the sperm into the 
vagina as proportionally it flows from the spigot, and the Duc, 
vanquished by the most delicious sensations, dying from joy, sees grow 
gradually slack, between his frigger’s fin gers, that high -spirited, 
mettlesome member whose ardor has just been so powerfully 
communicated to the rest of himself. He flings himself back upon his sofa, Duclos strides back to her throne, the child wipes herself, is 
consoled, and regains her quatrain , and the recital continues, leaving the 
spectators convinced of a truth wherewith, I believe, they have already 
been penetrated for a long time: that the idea of crime is able always to 
ignite the senses and lead us to lubricity.  I was greatly surprised , said Duclos, taking up the thread of her 
narrative, to see all my companions laugh when I returned, and ask me if I 
had wiped myself, and say a thousand other things which proved they knew 
perfectly well what had just happened. I was not long left in my qu andary; 
leading me into a room adjacent to the one in which the parties ordinarily took 
place and in which a short while before I had been at work, my sister showed 
me a hole which looked squarely upon the couch and from which it was easy to see everything  that transpired there. She told me that the young ladies found it 
diverting to watch what men did to their colleagues; I could come and do some spying whenever I wished, provided there was not someone already at the hole. For it not infrequently occurred,  said she, that this respectable hole had a 
part in mysteries which would be disclosed to me later on. The week was not out before I took advantage of my opportunities: one morning someone came and asked for a girl named Rosalie, one of the most lovely blo ndes it were 
possible to behold; I was curious to see what was to be done to her. I hid myself and witnessed the following scene . 
The man with whom she had to cope was no older than twenty -six or 
thirty. Immediately she entered, he had her sit down on a very high stool used 
especially for this ceremony. As soon as she was settled, he removed all her 
combs and hairpins and down all the way to the floor floated in a cloud the 
superb golden hair that adorned Rosalie’s head. He drew a comb from his 
pocket, comb ed her hair, took handfuls of it, tangled it, kissed it, everything he 
did was accompanied by remarks praising the beauty of that hair in which he 
took such a keen and exclusive interest. At last, from out of his trousers he 
pulled a smart little prick, already quite stiff, and he promptly enveloped it in 
his Dulcinea’s hair; once well wrapped, he began to fondle his dart and 
discharged, at the same time passing his other arm around Rosalie’s neck and 
applying his lips to her mouth. He extricated his defunc t engine, I saw that my companion’s hair was matted with glistening fuck; she cleaned it, put it up 
again, and our lovers separated . 
A month later, someone came in quest of my sister; this personage, I was 
told by the others, merited observing, for he had a most baroque specialty. He was a man of about fifty. Straightway he entered, without any preamble, 
without a caress, he exhibited his behind to my sister, who knew her part to 
perfection; he has her take her place on the bed, he backs toward her, she sei zes 
that flaccid and wrinkled old ass, drives her five fingers into the orifice, and 
begins to struggle and battle and worry it with such force the bed creaks. Be 
that as it may, without bringing anything else to light, our man wriggles, twitches, follows my sister’s movements, lends himself luxuriously to this 
fearful abuse, cries he is coming, comes, and affirms this is the greatest of all pleasures. He had indeed taken a furious buffeting, my sister was in a sweat; but what mild stuff! what lack of imagi nation ! 
Although the gentleman with whom I had to do not long afterward was 
hardly more difficult to satisfy, he at least seemed more voluptuous and, in my view, his mania had more of the libertine tincture. He was a heavy -set man of 
about forty -five, shor t, sturdy, but energetic and hearty. Never having met a 
person with his predilection, my first act, as soon as we were alone together, 
was to hoist my skirts to the navel: a dog confronted by a hickory stick could 
not have looked more unhappy: “Good God, d earie, let’s not have any of your 
cunt, please put it away.” So saying, he snatched down my skirts even more 
hastily than I had raised them. “These poor little whores,” he mumbled, 
screwing up his face in a pout, “never have anything but cunts to show you.  I 
may not be able to discharge this evening, thanks to that exhibition …unless I 
can succeed in getting the accursed image of that cunt out of my head.” Whereupon he turned me about and methodically raised my petticoats from 
behind. Guiding me himself, and  keeping my skirts raised at all times, he moved me about in order to observe how my buttocks bounced when I walked, 
and then he had me approach the bed, upon which he had me lie belly down. 
Next, with the most scrupulous attention he examined my ass, with  one hand 
screening his eyes to avoid any glimpse of my cunt whereof, it appeared, he was 
in mortal terror. At last, having warned me to do all in my power to conceal 
that unworthy  (I employ his expression ) part from his sight, he brought both 
hands to bea r on my ass and manipulated it lewdly and at length: he opened 
it, he closed it again, spread and squeezed it, sometimes he applied his mouth 
to it, and once or twice I even felt him press his lips to the hole; but he still had 
not touched himself, nothing  could be discerned. None the less, he must have 
felt hidden pressures mount and readied himself for the denouement of his little 
ritual. “Lie down,” he told me, tossing a few pillows on the floor, “yes, down 
there, that’s it, that will do …with your legs w ell spread, the ass a shade 
higher, and the hole stretched as wide open as it will go; come now, wider 
still,” he continued, noticing my docility. And then, taking a stool and placing 
it between my legs, he sat down in such a way that his prick, which he n ow 
dragged from his breeches and began to vibrate, was as it were at a level with 
the hole upon which he was to offer a libation. His movements now grew more 
rapid, with one hand he frigged himself, with the other he separated my 
buttocks, and a few adulat ory commendations seasoned with a quantity of 
hard language constituted his speech. “Ah, bugger the Almighty, here ’tis , the 
lovely ass,” he cried, “the sweet little hole, and how I’m going to wet it.” He 
kept his word. I felt myself soaked; his ecstasy se emed to annihilate the 
libertine. Ah, how true it is that the homage rendered at this temple is always more ardent than the incense which is burned at the other; and my worshiper 
left after promising to return to see me again, for he averred I satisfied hi s 
desires very well. He did indeed come back the next day, but was untrue to me, 
his inconstancy led him to my sister’s asshole; I observed them, saw everything: every aspect of the rite was absolutely the same, and my sister lent herself to it 
with the sa me good will . 
“Did your sister have a handsome ass?” Durcet inquired.  
“You may judge by one fact, my Lord,” Duclos replied. “A famous 
painter commissioned to do a Venus with a magnificent behind asked 
her the following year to be his model after having, he  said, consulted 
every procuress in Paris without finding anything to equal her.”  
“Well now, since she was fifteen and since we have a few girls of the 
same age here, compare her ass,” the financier continued, “with some of 
the asses you see in the room.”  
Duclos’ eyes came to rest upon Zelmire, and she told Durcet that it 
would be impossible, not only with respect to the ass, but even with respect to the face, to find anyone who bore a closer resemblance to her sister.  
“In that case,” said Durcet, “come her e, Zelmire, present your cheeks.”  
She did indeed belong to his quatrain; the charming girl approached 
all atremble. She was placed at the foot of the couch, made to lie upon 
her belly, her rump was raised by means of cushions, the little hole was 
in plain sight. The lecher’s prick begins to rise, he falls to kissing and 
fondling what lies under his nose. He orders Julie to frig him, she sets to 
work, his hands stray hither and yon, snatching at divers objects, lust 
heats his brain, under Julie’s voluptuous treatment his little prick looks as if it were about to stiffen, the lecher swears, the fuck flows, and the bell 
sounds for dinner.  
As the same profusion reigned at every meal, to have described one 
is to have described them all; but as almost everyone had discharged, 
there was a general need to recuperate strength, and therefore the 
friends drank a great deal at this supper. Zelmire, to whom they gave the sobriquet of Duclos’ sister, was to an uncommon degree regaled 
during the subsequent orgies, and every one simply had to kiss her ass. 
The Bishop left a puddle of fuck thereon, the three others restiffened over it, and they went to bed as they had the night before, that is to say, each with the wife he had had upon his couch, and with one of the four 
fucker s who had not appeared since the midday meal.    
THE THIRD DAY  
The Duc was abroad at nine o’clock. ’Twas  he who volunteered to be the 
first to lend a hand in the lessons Duclos was to administer to the little 
girls. He installed himself in an armchair and for one long hour 
submitted to various fondlings, masturbations, pollutions, and to a wide 
variety of tricks performed by each of those little ones who, throughout 
it all, were guided and supervised by their mistress; and as may be readily 
imagined, his sp irited temperament was furiously aroused by the 
ceremony. He was obliged to make unbelievable efforts to preserve his 
fuck from loss, but, more or less in control of himself, he managed to 
contain himself and returned to his friends in triumph, boasting th at 
he’d just weathered an assault he defied any one of them to beat off as 
phlegmatically. That brought on considerable wagering, the stakes were 
high, a fine of fifty louis  was ultimately imposed upon whoever 
discharged during the lessons.  
Instead of taki ng breakfast and conducting searches, this morning was 
employed in drawing up a program for the seventeen orgies planned for 
the end of each week, in this way definitively to fix the dates of the 
deflowerings now that, after having become better acquainted  with the 
subjects than they had been previously, they were able to pass legislation. 
In that this timetable in the most decisive manner regulated all the 
operations to be executed during the campaign, we have deemed it 
necessary to provide the reader with  a copy: it seems to us that, once he 
has perused it and familiarized himself with the subjects’ several 
destinies, he will be able to take a keener interest in their individual 
persons.  SCHEDULE OF WORKS TO BE 
ACCOMPLISHED DURING THE REMAINDER 
OF THE PART Y 
On the 7th of November, at which time the first week will have 
drawn a close, Messieurs shall proceed in the morning to the marriage of 
Michette and Giton, and those two wedded individuals, whose age 
forbids them from conjoining, as is true in the cases of the three following couples, shall be separated on their marriage night, for to 
closet them together would be as futile as this ridiculous ceremony which 
will serve only to create diversion during the day. That same evening, punishments which have accum ulated and been entered on the list kept 
by the month’s presiding officer shall be meted out.  
On the 14th, Messieurs shall in the same way effect the marriage of 
Narcisse and Hébé, with the same clauses as those cited above.  
On the 21st, in the same way, C olombe and Zélamir shall be married.  
On the 28th, Cupidon and Rosette.  
On the 4th of December, Champville’s narrations having prepared the 
way for the following enterprises, the Duc shall deflower Fanny.  
On the 5th, the said Fanny shall be wedded to Hyacin the who, in the 
presence of the company assembled, shall take his pleasure with his 
young wife. In such will consist the fifth week’s festival, and the 
corrections shall take place in the evening as usual, because the marriages shall be celebrated in the m orning.  
On the 8th, Curval shall deflower Michette.  On the 11th, the Duc shall deflower Sophie.  
On the 12th, to celebrate the sixth week’s festival, Sophie shall be 
married to Céladon, and the clauses cited for the above -mentioned 
marriage shall be made to  apply to this one; this shall not be repeated for 
those to follow.  
On the 15th, Curval shall deflower Hébé.  
On the 18th, the Duc shall deflower Zelmire, and on the 19th, in 
order to celebrate the seventh week’s festival, Adonis shall marry 
Zelmire.  
On the  20th, Curval shall deflower Colombe.  
On the 25th, Christmas Day, the Duc shall deflower Augustine, and 
on the 26th, for the eighth week’s festival, Zéphyr shall marry 
Augustine.  
On the 29th, Curval shall deflower Rosette, and all the foregoing 
arrangement s have been made to insure that Curval, less well membered 
than the Duc, be provided with more youthful girls.  
On the 1st of January, the first day of the year and the one upon 
which Martaine’s newly begun narration will influence imaginations to consider new pleasures, the sodomistic deflorations shall be inaugurated, 
and shall proceed in the following order:  
On the 1st of January, the Duc shall sound Hébé’s ass.  
On the 2nd, in celebration of the ninth week, Hébé, having been 
plumbed fore by Curval, from behind by the Duc, shall be turned over to Hercule, who, before the company assembled, shall employ her for 
purposes to be specified upon the occasion.  
On the 4th, Curval shall embugger Zélamir.  
On the 6th, the Duc shall embugger Michette; on the 9th, in 
celebration of the tenth week’s festival, the said Michette, who will have 
been deflowered fore by Curval, and whose ass will have been tried by the Duc, shall be turned over to Bum -Cleaver, that he may enjoy her, 
etc., etc.  
On the 11th, the Bishop shall sodomize Cupidon.  
On the 13th, Curval shall sodomize Zelmire.  
On the 15th, the Bishop shall sodomize Colombe.  
On the 16th, for the eleventh week’s festival, Colombe, whose cunt 
will have been deflowered by Curval, her ass by the Bishop, shall be turned over t o Antinoüs, who shall enjoy her, etc.  
On the 17th, the Duc shall embugger Giton.  
On the 19th, Curval shall embugger Sophie.  
On the 21st, the Bishop shall embugger Narcisse.  
On the 22nd, the Duc shall embugger Rosette.  
On the 23rd, for the twelfth week’s fe stival, Rosette shall be turned 
over to Invictus.  
On the 25th, Curval shall march into Augustine’s behind.  On the 28th, the Bishop shall enter Fanny’s.  
On the 30th, for the thirteenth week’s festival, the Duc shall take 
Hercule for his husband and Zéphyr f or his wife, and the marriage shall 
be both accomplished and consummated before the eyes of everyone, as 
shall be the three others which follow.  
On the 6th of February, for the fourteenth week’s festival, Bum -
Cleaver shall become Curval’s husband, Adonis h is wife.  
On the 13th of February, for the fifteenth week’s festival, Antinoüs 
shall be made husband to the Bishop, to him shall Céladon be made a 
wife.  
On the 20th of February, for the sixteenth week’s festival, Invictus 
shall as a husband be wedded to Dur cet, Hyacinthe as a wife.  
As for the festival of the seventeenth week, due to fall on the 27th of 
February, upon the eve of the narrations’ conclusion, it shall be 
celebrated by sacrifices for which Messieurs reserve themselves in petto  
the choice of victims.  
These arrangements provide for the obliteration of all maidenheads by 
the 30th of January, with the exception of those of the four young boys 
whom Messieurs are to marry as wives, and whom they are eager to 
preserve intact until their weddings, in orde r that their amusement be 
made to last until the end of the party.  
As the objects are progressively depucelated, they shall take the place 
of the wives upon the couches at storytelling time, and, at nighttime, 
they shall lie with Messieurs, alternately, an d at Messieurs’ choice, together with the last four fairies Messieurs will take to themselves as 
wives during the final month.  
From the moment a girl or a depucelated boy shall have replaced a 
wife upon the couch, the said wife shall be repudiated. From th is 
moment onward, she shall be in general discredit, and shall be ranked 
lower than the servants.  
With regard to Hébé, aged twelve, Michette, aged twelve, Colombe, 
aged thirteen, and Rosette, aged thirteen, as progressively they are surrendered to the fuck ers and exercised by the latter, they too shall fall 
into discredit, shall henceforth be used for none but harsh and brutal 
purposes, shall rank with the repudiated wives, and shall be treated with 
the utmost rigor. And as of the 24th of January, all four of them will 
have descended to the same inferior level.  
This schedule affirms that unto the Duc shall fall nine pucelages: the 
first encuntments of Fanny, Sophie, Zelmire, Augustine, the original embuggeries of Hébé, Michette, Giton, Rosette, and Zéphyr.  
Unto Curval shall fall the cunt -pucelages of Michette, Hébé, 
Colombe, Rosette, the ass -pucelages of Zélamir, Zelmire, Sophie, 
Augustine, and Adonis, being in all nine deflorations.  
Unto Durcet, who does not fuck at all, is reserved the ass -pucelage of 
Hyaci nthe, who in the capacity of a wife shall be wedded to him.  
And unto the Bishop, who fucks naught but asses, are reserved the 
sodomistical depucelations of Cupidon, of Colombe, of Narcisse, of 
Fanny, and of Céladon.  The entire day having been spent prepari ng this program and chatting 
about it, and no one having been found at fault, all went uneventfully 
ahead, the storytelling hour arrived; everyone took his place, the 
illustrious Duclos mounted the stage. She proceeded in this wise:  
A young man, whose mani a, although not in my opinion very libertine, is 
none the less curious enough, appeared at Madame Guérin’s shortly after the adventure I spoke of yesterday. He had to have a young and healthy wet nurse; he suckled the good woman’s teat and leaked his seed over her thighs while 
gorging himself on her milk. His prick struck me as paltry and mean, all his 
person rather puny, and his discharge was as mild as his proceedings were benign . 
Another one appeared in the same room the next day; his mania will 
doubtles s prove more entertaining to you. He insisted upon having his woman 
enveloped in a sheet so that her face and breast would be entirely hidden from 
him, the single part of her body he wanted to see, and which had to be of the 
highest degree of excellence, w as her ass, all the rest meant nothing to him, and 
he assured Madame Guérin that a glimpse of anything else would anger him 
exceedingly. Guérin had a woman brought in from the outside: she was ugly to 
the point of bitterness and almost fifty years old, but  her buttocks were molded 
like those of Venus, nothing more beautiful could ever bewitch one’s gaze.  
I was eager to see this operation; the old duenna, well wrapped up, was told 
at once to lie belly down on the edge of the bed. Our libertine, a man of abou t 
thirty and who seemed to me a gentleman of the cloth, lifts her skirts above her 
loins, is thrilled by what greets his eyes and flatters his tastes. He touches, he 
spreads this superb breech, showers passionate kisses upon it, and, his 
imagination fired by what he supposes rather than by what he would actually 
have seen had the woman been unveiled and even had she been attractive, he 
fancies he is holding commerce with Aphrodite herself, and at the end of a fairly brief career, his engine hardens thanks t o the jerks and jolts, and unlooses 
a warm rain over the ensemble of the sublime ass exposed to his view. His 
discharge was sharp and impetuous. He was seated facing the adored idol; one 
of his hands opened it while with the other he polluted it, and he cr ied ten 
times in succession: “Ah, what a beautiful ass! Ah, what a delight to drown 
such an ass in fuck!” He rose when done, and left without indicating the least 
desire to find out with whom he had been dealing . 
A young abbot called for my sister a short time afterward. He was youthful 
and handsome, but one could scarcely discern his prick, so minute and soft it was. He stretched his almost naked partner on a couch, knelt down between her thighs, supporting her buttocks with both hands, with one of them ti ckling 
the pretty little hole in her behind. Meanwhile, he conveyed his mouth to my sister’s cunt. He tickled its clitoris with his tongue, and managed so cunningly, so harmoniously synchronized the two activities, that within the space of three 
minutes he  had plunged her into a delirium; I saw her head toss about, her eyes 
begin to roll, and heard the rascal cry: “Ah, my dear Reverend Father, you’re 
slaying me with pleasure!”  
The abbot’s custom was simply to swallow the liquid his libertine dexterity 
made flow; and this he did not now fail to do, shaking himself the while, 
agitating himself as he bore down upon my sister: I saw him spatter 
indubitable evidence of his virility upon the floor. My turn came the next day, 
and I believe I can assure you, Messieu rs, that it was one of the sweetest 
operations to which in all my life I have ever been exposed: that scoundrel of 
an abbot had my first fruits, and it was into his mouth I shed my first fuck. 
More eager than my sister to give him pleasure in return for what he had 
caused me, I unthinkingly seized his drooping prick, and my little hand replied 
to what his mouth had made me feel with such delight . The Duc could not prevent himself from interrupting at this point. 
To a remarkable degree excited by the polluti ons he had undergone that 
same morning, he had an idea that this species of lubric sport executed 
with the fascinating Augustine, whose sparkling, roguish eyes announced the most precocious temperament, would deliver him of a 
charge of fuck that was stinging his balls in a dreadful way. She was a 
member of his quatrain, he found her likeable, she was destined to be deflowered by him, he summoned her. On this particular evening she 
had a kerchief tied round her head, was clad in peasant guise, and 
seemed charming beneath that costume. The duenna hoisted her skirts and established her in the posture Duclos had represented. The Duc first 
of all lay hands on her buttocks, knelt, brought a finger to the anus and 
lightly titillated its rim, seized up the clitoris this amiable child already had in considerable growth, and sucked it. The people of Languedoc are 
high-spirited, they say, and Augustine proved them right; fire leapt into 
her pretty eyes, she sighed and panted and moaned, her thighs rose 
mechanically, and the Duc was pleased to sip a gush of young fuck 
which in all likelihood had never flowed before.  
But joy is seldom succeeded by joy. There are libertines so hardened 
in vice that the simpler, the more delicate and banal be the thing they 
do, the less effe ct it has upon their execrable minds. Of their number our 
beloved Duc was one, he swallowed that delicious child’s sperm without 
his own contriving to flow; all present beheld the moment arrive, for no one is more illogical than a libertine, the moment app eared at hand, I 
say, when he would blame his unresponse upon the poor little wretch 
who, all a dither at having yielded to Nature, was hiding her face in her 
hands and struggling to get free and return to her place.  “Get me another one,” thundered the Duc , casting furious glances at 
Augustine, “I’ll suck every last one of them if that’s required to lose my 
fuck.”  
Zelmire, the second girl in his quatrain, was brought to the fore, she 
too was the Duc’s by escheat. Though equal in years to Augustine, the 
grief for her plight robbed her of the power to taste a pleasure which, 
who knows, had it not been for that, Nature might have allowed her to 
relish. Up rose her skirts, up above two little thighs whiter than 
alabaster, a chubby little mons  veneris  hove into v iew, it was upholstered 
by a fluffy down just beginning to appear. She is adjusted, obliged to 
yield, she obeys automatically, but sweat, strain, suck though he does, 
nothing happens to the Duc. Fifteen minutes of this and he rises in a 
fury, and, flinging  himself into his closet with Hercule and Narcisse:  
“Ah, by fuck!” he roars. “It’s very clear to me that’s not the game I’m 
hunting” —’tis  to the two little girls he alludes —“and that I’ll only have a 
fair shot at this.”  
It is not known to what excesses he surrendered himself, but ere an 
instant had passed screams and shouts declared he had carried the day, 
and proved that boys are always the far more certain implements to a 
discharge than the most adorable girls. In the meantime, the Bishop had 
likewise enc hambered himself with Giton, Zélamir, and Invictus, and 
the outbursts which accompanied his discharge having struck the 
assembly’s ears, the two brothers, who had probably resorted to similar expedients, returned, more calmly to listen to the rest of the s tory our 
heroine took up again in these terms:  
Nigh unto two years passed by during which time no one of particular 
interest arrived at Madame Guérin’s; the gentlemen who called either had 
tastes too ordinary to warrant description, or had tastes analogous  to those I have already described; and then one day I was told to prepare myself, and 
above all to wash out my mouth. A heavy, thickset man of about fifty stood 
beside the mistress of the house . 
“Well, there she is,” said Madame. “She’s only twelve, Monsi eur, just as 
clean and tidy as if she’d come this morning out of her mother’s belly, and you 
can take my word for that.”  
The customer inspects me, has me open my mouth, he examines my teeth, 
sniffs my breath, and evidently satisfied that all is in order, h e goes with me 
into the sanctuary intended for pleasure. We sit down face to face and very 
near to one another. No one could be more solemn than my gallant nor more phlegmatic. He stares coldly at me, then appraises me with narrowed eyes, I 
have no idea wh ere all this is leading when, finally breaking his silence, he 
bids me collect a mouthful of saliva. I obey, and as soon as he fancies my mouth 
must be full, he throws himself upon my neck, passionately puts his arm 
around my head, thereby immobilizing it,  and gluing his lips to my mouth, he 
pumps, sucks, eagerly swallows all the bewitching fluid I have collected, and it 
seems enough to put him in an overwhelming ecstasy. He sucks my tongue into 
his mouth with identical fervor, and when he senses it is dry,  perceives my 
mouth is empty, he commands me to repeat the operation. He reiterates his, 
then I do, then he does, and so on eight or ten times over . 
He sucked up my saliva with such furious avidity it discomfited my chest 
and lungs. I thought that at least a few sparks of pleasure were going to climax 
his transports; I was mistaken. His apathy, whence he emerged only for brief instants during his most intense suckings, compassed him again immediately 
he had drained me, and when at last I told him I could do  no more, he fell to 
eyeing me distantly, to staring at me as he had at the beginning, then got up 
without a word, paid Guérin, and left . “Ah, God’s prick and balls !” cried Curval, “I’m happier than he, for 
I’m coming.”  
Everyone raised his head, everyone s aw the dear Président doing to 
Julie, his wife, whom that day he had for couch companion, the same 
thing Duclos had just been relating. That this passion appealed 
admirably to his tastes was generally well known; Julie by and large 
procured him abundant pl easure in this manner, Duclos had no doubt 
done less well by her gallant. But that was in all likelihood his own fault; 
failing to appreciate what certain mouths, in certain conditions, may 
offer, he got nothing from Duclos’, whereas the Président obtained  
satisfaction from Julie’s.  
A month later, said Duclos, who had been invited to continue, I had 
dealings with a sucker who assailed what one might term the same fort but from an entirely different angle. This latter was an elderly abbot who, after 
having p reviously kissed and caressed my bum for above half an hour, 
introduced his tongue into its hole, made it penetrate deep, dart to left and 
right, turn this way, turn that way, all with such surpassing art I thought I 
felt it drive nigh to the depths of my entrails. But this abbot of mine, much less 
phlegmatic, as he used one hand to spread my buttocks, used the other to frig 
himself very voluptuously, and as he discharged he drew my anus to his face 
with such violence and tickled it so lubriciously that my ecstasy coincided with 
his. When he was finished, he spent another moment scrutinizing my buttocks, 
staring at that hole he’d just reamed wider, and couldn’t prevent himself from 
gluing his mouth to it one last time; then he hastened off, assuring me he 
would be back frequently, would ask for me, and that he was most content 
with my ass. He kept his promise, and for six months he came to visit me three 
or four times a week, regularly performing the same operation to which I 
became so thoroughly accustomed t hat each time he executed his little project, I all but expired with delight—an aspect of the rite about which he appeared to 
care very little, for, as best I could judge, he had no inclination to find out 
whether or no my work pleased me; that did not seem to matter to him. And 
indeed, who can tell? Men are extraordinary indeed; had he known of it, my pleasure might even have displeased him . 
And now Durcet, whom the story had inflamed, like the old priest 
was moved to suck some asshole or other, but would not have a girl’s. He called for Hyacinthe, who of them all pleased him the most. He placed 
the little chap, kissed his ass, frigged his prick and sucked it. By the 
nervous shuddering of his body, by the spasm which ordinarily heralded his discharge, it wa s thought the evil little anchovy that Aline was 
thumping and pulling as best she could, was finally going to disgorge its seed, but no, the financier was penurious when it came to parting with his fuck, he simply could not, or would not, stiffen. It occur s to them all 
that his object ought to be changed, Céladon is substituted for Hyacinthe, but all’s at a standstill, not the least improvement is apparent. The opportune tolling of a bell announcing supper saves the banker’s 
honor.  
“Why,” says he, laughing with his confreres, “it’s not my fault, you 
saw I was about to win a victory; this damned supper will have to delay it. Well, by God, let’s go and have a fling at the table, I’ll return all the 
more ardent to Cupid’s tourney after having been crowned by Ba cchus.”  
The evening meal was equally succulent and gay, quite as lubricious 
as ever, and was followed by orgies in the course of which an abundance of little infamies were perpetrated. Many were the mouths 
sucked and the asses, but one of the most engaging  drolleries of all was 
the game in which they hid the face and chest of each little girl and 
gambled upon recognizing her on the basis of a study of her ass. The Duc was occasionally misled, but not so the others, for they were too 
well accustomed to the u se of the bum. The friends retired for the 
night, and the morrow brought further and new pleasures, and a few reflections.    
THE FOURTH DAY  
Being full eager to be able to distinguish immediately which of the 
youngsters in either sex was, in a depucelatory  sense, to belong to each of 
their number, the friends decided to have them wear, regardless of their 
costume and, in that other extreme, even when undressed, a hair ribbon, 
which would indicate of whom the individual child was the property. 
Colors were th ereupon chosen: the Duc adopted pink and green: 
whosoever should wear a pink ribbon to the fore, would be his by the cunt; similarly, whosoever wore a green ribbon to the rear, would be his by the ass. And so Fanny, Zelmire, Sophie, and Augustine straightw ay 
affixed a pink ribbon on one side of their coiffures; Rosette, Hébé, 
Michette, Giton, and Zéphyr attached a green favor to their hair where 
it fell toward the neck, this clue attesting the rights the Duc enjoyed to 
their asses.  
Curval chose black for th e front, yellow for the rear; thus Michette, 
Hébé, Colombe, and Rosette were in future constantly to wear a black ribbon forward; Sophie, Zelmire, Augustine, Zélamir, and Adonis 
pinned a yellow one above their nape.  
Durcet identified his Hyacinthe with a l ilac ribbon hanging to the 
rear, and the Bishop, who owned title to but five assholes to be 
deflowered sodomistically, ordered Cupidon, Narcisse, Céladon, Colombe, and Fanny to wear a violet one in the rear.  
Never, regardless of the subject’s posture, chore, or dress, were these 
ribbons to be neglected or improperly worn, and so it was that by this 
simple arrangement each friend was always able to tell at a glance what 
property was his, and in what way.  Curval, who had passed the night with Constance, had bitter 
complaints to lodge against her in the morning. It was not entirely clear 
what lay at the root of the trouble, nor what precisely the trouble was; so 
little is needed to displease a libertine. But there was more than enough to the thing to cause him to have her listed for Saturday punishment, 
and he was formulating charges when that lovely creature declared that 
she was pregnant; Curval, apart from her husband the only one whom it was possible to suspect as the agent in this affair, had effected no ca rnal 
juncture with her save at the beginning of this party, that is to say, four days previously. Our libertines were gladdened by these tidings, seeing in the event much possibility of clandestine delight, and the Duc exulted 
over this stroke of fortune. In any event, the declaration earned her 
exemption from the punishment she would otherwise have had to undergo in return for having displeased Curval. She was to be spared: 
they preferred to leave the fruits on the branch to ripen, a gravid woman 
diverted them, and what they promised themselves for later on even 
more lewdly entertained their perfidious imaginations. Constance was 
dispensed from service at table, from chastisements, and from a few 
other little odds and ends the accomplishment of which her st ate no 
longer rendered voluptuous to observe, but she was still obliged to 
appear upon the couches and until further orders to share the bed of 
whoever wished to choose her for the night.  
It was Durcet who, that morning, contributed his presence to the 
pollution exercises, and as his prick was extraordinarily small, he gave the 
pupils rather more of a problem than had been posed by the Duc’s 
massive construction. However, they fell earnestly to work. But the little 
banker, who had been plying a woman’s trade all night long, could never 
bear a man’s. He was adamant, intractable, and the skill of these eight charming students combined with that of their deft instructress was 
unable, when all was said and done, even to get him to raise his nose. He 
left the cla ssroom in triumph, and as impotence always provokes that 
kind of mood called a teasing one in the idiom of libertinage, his 
inspections were astonishingly severe. Rosette amongst the girls, Zélamir 
amongst the boys were the victims of his thoroughness: one  was not as 
she had been told to be —this enigma will be explained —the other, 
unfortunately, had rid himself of what he had been ordered to keep.  
Those present at the public latrines were only seven in number: 
Duclos, Marie, Aline, and Fanny, two second -class fuckers, and Giton. 
Curval, who did considerable stiffening that day, grew very excited over Duclos. Dinner, at which his conduct and remarks were very libertine 
indeed, calmed him not one whit, and the coffee served by Colombe, Sophie, Zéphyr, and his dear friend Adonis, set his brain all afire. He 
laid hands on this selfsame Adonis, tumbled him onto a sofa, and while 
spewing forth oaths slid his enormous member between the lad’s thighs (approaching him from behind), and as that outsized tool protruded a 
fair six inches beyond, he commanded Adonis vigorously to frig what 
emerged, and himself set to frigging the boy above the morsel of flesh 
upon which Adonis was spitted. Meanwhile, he presented the assembly 
with an ass no less filthy than broad, whose im pure orifice began to exert 
a potent attraction upon the Duc. Seeing this ass within reach, he 
trained his vivacious prick on the hole while continuing to suck Zephyr’s 
mouth, an operation he had begun before this new idea had occurred to 
him. 
Curval, who had not been expecting such an attack, emitted 
blasphemous paeans of joy. He danced with delight, spread himself wider, braced himself; at the same instant, the fresh young fuck of the charming boy he was frigging started to drip out upon the enormous 
head of his own aroused instrument. That warm fuck he feels wetting 
him, the reiterated blows of the Duc who is also beginning to discharge, it all quickens his warrior’s soul, the weapon is primed, off goes the gun, floods of foamy sperm splash against Durcet ’s ass, for the banker has just 
posted himself there within easy range lest, says he, something be wasted, and Durcet’s plump white buttocks are submerged beneath a spellbinding liquor he would have by far preferred as a rinse for his 
bowels.  
Nor was the B ishop idle; he was one after the other sucking clean the 
divine assholes of Colombe and Sophie. But doubtless fatigued by some 
nocturnal exercise, he showed not one spark of life, and like all other 
libertines rendered unjust by caprice and disgust, he las hed out furiously 
against these two delicious children, blaming them for the only too well 
merited shortcomings of his debilitated frame. Messieurs nap for a few 
minutes; then ’tis  storytelling time, and in they troop to listen to the 
amiable Duclos, who r esumes her tale in the following manner:  
There had been a few changes in Madame Guérin’s house , said our 
heroine. Two very pretty girls had just found dupes who were only too 
willing to keep them and whom they deceived just the way we all do. To fill 
the g aps in the ranks, our dear mother had scouted around and set her sights 
upon a rue Saint -Denis tavern  keeper’s daughter, thirteen years old and one of 
the most fetching creatures in all the wide world. But the little lady, quite as well behaved  as she was pious, was successfully resisting all enticements when 
Guérin, having one day employed the cleverest stratagem to lure her to her 
house, immediately put her in the hands of the unusual person whose mania I 
propose to describe next. He was an ecclesiastic o f fifty -five or fifty -six, but so 
youthful and vigorous you’d have thought him under forty. No man in Europe had such a singular talent for drawing young girls into vice, and as it was his 
one art, developed to a sublime degree, he had turned it into his o ne and only 
pleasure. The whole of his fleshly delight consisted in extirpating childhood prejudices and unnatural terrors, in cultivating scorn for virtue, in decking vice in the most dazzling colors. He neglected nothing: seductive images, 
flattering pro mises, delicious examples, he would press everything into service, 
everything would be brilliantly manipulated, his artistry being faultlessly 
attuned to the child’s age and cast of mind, and never did he miss the mark. 
Granted a mere two hours of conversa tion, he was sure to make a whore of the 
best-behaved and most reasonable little girl; for thirty years he had been 
conducting his missionary labors in Paris, and, he had once assured Madame 
Guérin, who counted herself one of his best friends, he had to hi s credit more 
than ten thousand girls whom he had personally seduced and plunged into 
libertinage. He rendered similar services to at least fifteen procuresses, and 
whenever he was not coping with a particular problem at someone else’s 
behest, he was busy doing research for its own sake and for his professional 
pleasure, energetically corrupting whatever he came across and then packing it 
off to his outfitters. Now, the most extraordinary aspect of the entire thing, 
and the one which, Messieurs, prompts me to cite the example of this 
uncommon individual, was that he never enjoyed the fruit of his labors. He 
would encloset himself alone with the child, but, despite his vast 
understanding, his mind’s agility, his eloquent persuasiveness, he used always to emer ge from conference greatly inflamed. One could be perfectly certain the 
operation irritated his senses, but it was impossible to discover where or when or how he satisfied them. Closest scrutiny had never revealed anything but a 
prodigious blaze in his sta re when once he had concluded his speeches, a few 
twitching movements of his hand upon the front of his breeches, within which one could tell there was a definite erection, produced by the diabolic work he 
was doing; but that was all . 
He came to the house,  was accorded a private interview with the young 
barmaid, I watched the proceedings: the consultation was prolonged, the seducer’s language was amazingly pathetic, the child wept, got hot, seemed to 
enter into a kind of enthusiastic fit; it was at this mom ent the orator’s eyes 
flamed brightest, and it was now we remarked the gestures in the 
neighborhood of his fly. Not long afterward, he rose, the child stretched forth 
her arms as if seeking to embrace him, he kissed her in a grave and fatherly 
manner, with out any trace of lechery. He left, and three hours later the little 
girl arrived with her baggage at Madame Guérin’s . 
“And the man?” asked the Duc.  
“He disappeared once his sermon was over,” Duclos replied.  
“Without coming back to see the results of his work?”  
“No, my Lord, there was no doubt in his mind. He had never once 
failed.”  
“Now there is a most extraordinary personage,” Curval admitted. 
“What does your Grace make of it?”  
“I suspect,” the Duc answered, “that the seduction provided all the 
heat necess ary and that he discharged in his breeches.”  
“No,” quoth the Bishop, “I think you underestimate the man: all this 
was simply by way of preparation for his debauches, and upon leaving I wager he went off to consummate greater ones.”  
“Greater ones?” cried Du rcet. “And what more delicious, more 
voluptuous delight could one hope to procure oneself, than that of enjoying the object one creates?”  
“I have it!” spoke up the Duc, “I dare say I’ve found him out: all this, 
just as you say, was merely preparatory in ch aracter, corrupting girls would heat his imagination, then off he’d go to dip his tool in boys …. 
I’ll wager he was a bugger, yes, ’tis  plain.”  
Duclos was asked whether she had any evidence to support that 
conjecture, and did he or did he not also seduce little boys? Our narrator 
replied that she had no proof of the thing, and despite the Duc’s 
exceedingly likely allegation, everyone remained more or less in suspense 
as to the character of that strange preacher; after it had been unanimously agreed that his mania was truly delicious, but that one had 
either to consummate the work or do worse afterward, Duclos went on 
with her story:  
The day after the arrival of our young novice, who was named Henriette, 
there came to the establishment an eccentric old lecher who put us both, Henriette and I, to work at the same time. This latest libertine had no other pleasure than that of observing through a hole all the voluptuous activities 
transpiring in an adjoining room, he adored spying on them, thus found in 
others’ pl easures the divine aliment of his own lubricity. He was installed in 
the room I mentioned to you, the same one to which I and my companions 
often repaired for the diversion of watching libertines in action. I was assigned 
the task of amusing him while he l ooked through the hole, and young Henriette 
entered the arena together with the asshole -sucker I described to you yesterday. 
The management considered that rascal’s very voluptuous antics just the kind 
of spectacle my onlooker would relish, and in order be tter to arouse the actor, 
and in order that he render the scene yet more lascivious and more agreeable to 
see, he was told he was being given an apprentice and that it was with him 
she was to make her debut. The little barmaid’s air of modesty and childish ness 
speedily convinced him of it; and so he was as hot and as lewd in his nasty 
stunts as ’twere  possible to be; nothing could have been further from his mind 
than that he was being observed. As for my old buck, his eye glued to the hole, one hand on my b um, the other on his prick, which he gently agitated, he 
seemed to be keeping the progress of his ecstasy abreast the one he was 
watching. “Ah, what a sight!” he said now and again; “what a fine ass that 
little girl has, and how well that bugger in there i s tonguing it.” At last, 
Henriette’s lover having discharged, mine folded me in his arms and, after a 
moment’s kissing, he turned me over, fondled, kissed, lewdly licked my behind, 
and squirted evidence of his virility over my cheeks . 
“While frigging himse lf?” the Duc asked.  
“Yes, my Lord,” answered Duclos, “and frigging a prick whose 
incredible littleness, I assure you, isn’t worth the bother describing.”  
The gentleman with whom I had to do next , Duclos continued, would 
not perhaps deserve to be included i n my report were it not for one element, a 
rather unusual one, I should say, which distinguished his otherwise quite routine pleasures, and this little circumstance will illustrate to what point 
libertinage is able to degrade all a man’s feelings of modesty, virtue, and 
decorum. This person did not want to see; he wished to be seen. Knowing that men exist whose whim it is to spy upon the pleasure- takings of others, he bade 
Guérin find him one such fellow, conceal him, and said he would enact a 
drama for him . Guérin at once got in touch with the man I had entertained a 
few days previously behind the partition, and without telling him that the 
performer he was about to see knew that he was going to be seen —this would 
have interfered with his passion’s fulfillm ent—she gave him to believe he was 
to observe a very arcane mystery indeed . 
The inspector and my sister were put in the room with the hole, the actor 
and I went into the other one. He was a young man about twenty -eight years 
old, handsome and strong. Infor med of the hole’s location, he not too pointedly 
moved to where he could be perfectly viewed and had me take my place beside him. I frigged him. When his prick held a good slope, he got to his feet, 
exhibited his tool to the inspector, turned around, displayed his ass, raised my 
skirts and showed mine, knelt before me, teased my anus with the tip of his 
nose, spread heartily, displayed everything with as much thoroughness as delight, and discharged by frigging himself, the while keeping my hinder skirts 
high and my ass squarely opposite the spy hole, in such wise that he who stood 
posted on the other side of the wall simultaneously beheld, at this decisive 
moment, both my bum and my lover’s wrathful device. If the latter was in 
seventh heaven, God knows what  was going on in the next room; my sister 
later told me she had had a madman on her back who had sworn he’d never 
had as fine a time as this, and after that her buttocks had been washed by a 
tide no less fierce than the one that had burst over mine . 
“If th at young man of yours truly had a good prick and a pretty ass,” 
Durcet opinioned, “there was ample in the situation to provoke a 
generous discharge.”  
“It must then have been delicious,” returned Duclos, “for his engine 
was very long, quite thick, and his a ss as soft, as sweetly plump, as 
attractively formed as the god of love’s.”  
“Did you spread his cheeks?” the Bishop inquired. “Did you show his 
vent to the inspector?”  
“Yes, your Lordship,” said Duclos, “he displayed mine, I displayed his, 
he presented it with incomparable suggestiveness.”  
“I’ve been witness to a dozen such scenes,” Durcet announced, “which 
have cost me a fortune in fuck; there is nothing more delicious to see or 
do. I refer to both: for it is just as pleasant to spy upon someone as to 
want  to be observed.”  Another individual, with approximately the same tastes , Duclos went on, 
took me to the Tuileries some few months later. He wanted me to accost men 
and frig them six inches from his face while he hid under a pile of folding 
chairs; and aft er I had frigged seven or eight passers -by, he settled himself 
upon a bench by one of the most frequented of the paths, lifted my skirts from 
behind, and displayed my ass to all and sundry, put his prick in the air and 
ordered me to frig it well within vie w of half of Paris, the which, although it 
was at night, created such a scandal that by the time he most cynically 
unleashed his fuck, more than ten people had gathered around us, and we were 
obliged to dash away to avoid being publicly covered with shame . 
When I related this adventure to Guérin, she laughed approvingly and said 
she had once known a man in Lyon (where panders enter into the trade at an early age), a man, I say, whose mania was certainly just as unusual. He would disguise himself as a public  mercury, himself fetch in visitors to dally with the 
two girls he paid and maintained for no other purpose, then he would conceal himself in a corner to watch his client go to work; the girl, whose hire depended upon her skill in these moments, would guid e the libertine she had in her arms 
and unfailingly give her employer a view of his prick and ass, the sight of 
which constituted the one pleasure that agreed with our false pimp’s palate, the 
one that was able to loosen his fuck.  
Duclos having brought her  recital to an early conclusion that evening, 
the time that remained until supper was devoted to a few choice 
lubricities, and as the example of the cynic had fired their four daring 
brains, the friends did not isolate themselves in their closets, but 
disported within clear view each of the other. The Duc had Duclos strip 
off her clothes, had her bend and lean upon the back of a chair and 
commanded Desgranges to frig him upon her comrade’s buttocks, in 
such wise that the head of his prick might graze Duclos ’ asshole with each stroke. To that one was added a number of other episodes which 
the proper presentation of our material forbids us from disclosing at this 
stage; but the fact remains that the chronicler’s inferior vent was 
completely sprayed and that th e Duc, handsomely served and entirely 
surrounded, discharged to the tune of bellowings and shouts which 
indicated to what a point his mind had been stimulated. Curval had 
himself fucked, the Bishop and Durcet for their part did passing strange things with both sexes; then supper was served.  
After it, dances were held: the sixteen youngsters, the four fuckers, 
and the four wives were able to perform three quadrilles, but all the participants at the ball were naked, and our roués, indolently reclining 
upon sofas, were deliciously amused by all the different beauties one 
after another offered them by the divers attitudes the dancers were obliged to strike. Messieurs had the storytellers at their side, and these 
ladies manualized them rapidly or slowly, dependin g upon the pleasure 
they were experiencing; but, somewhat fatigued by the day’s frolickings, 
no one discharged, and each went to bed to acquire the strength needed 
for all the following day’s new infamies.    
THE FIFTH DAY  
That morning it was Curval’s duty  to lend his presence at the academy of 
masturbation, and as the little girls were beginning to make tangible 
progress, he was hard put to resist the multiplying thumps and jerks and 
the variegated but universally lubricious postures of these eight charmin g 
little maids. Wishing to keep his weapon charged, he withdrew without 
firing it, lunch was announced, and at table the friends decreed that 
Messieurs’ four young lovers, to wit: Zéphyr, the Duc’s favorite; Adonis, 
beloved of Curval; Hyacinthe, friend to Durcet; and Céladon, unto whom the Bishop was plighted, were henceforth to be admitted to all 
meals, would dine beside their lovers in whose bedchambers they were, 
as well, regularly to sleep, a favor they would share with the wives and 
fuckers; the which eliminated a ceremony customarily performed, as the 
reader is aware, every morning, this ceremony consisting in the fetching 
of the four lads by the four off- duty fuckers. They were now to come of 
their own accord, and when from now on Messieurs were to pa ss into 
the little boys’ chambers, they were to be received, in accordance with prescribed regulation, by the remaining four only.  
The Duc, who for the past two or three days had been head over heels 
in love with Duclos, whose ass he found superb and langu age pleasing, 
demanded that she also sleep in his bedroom, and this precedent having been established, Curval similarly introduced Fanchon, of whom he was 
passionately fond, into his. The two others decided to wait yet a little 
longer before deciding who was to fill this fourth post of privilege in 
their chambers.  It was that same morning ruled that the four young lovers who had 
just been chosen would have by way of ordinary dress, whenever they 
were not obliged to wear characterizing costumes, as when form ed in 
quatrains, would have, I say, the clothing and style I am going to 
describe: it was a little jerkin, tight -fitting, of light cloth, tailored like a 
Prussian uniform with a slit tail, but much shorter, scarcely reaching to halfway down the thigh; this  jacket, like all uniforms buttoned across the 
chest and at the vent, was of pink satin lined with white taffeta, the cuffs 
and trim were white satin, underneath was to be worn a kind of short 
vest or waistcoat, also of white satin, and the breeches were t o match; 
but these breeches were provided with a heart -shaped rear flap under 
which one could slip one’s hand and grasp the ass without the slightest difficulty; the flap was held up by a ribbon tied in a big bow, and when one wished to have the child comp letely exposed in this part, one had 
merely to undo the bow, which was of the color selected by the friend to whom the pucelage belonged. Their hair, carelessly arranged so that a few curls fell to either side, floated absolutely free behind, and was 
simpl y knotted by a ribbon of the appropriate color. A highly- scented 
powder, in color between gray and pink, tinted their hairdress, their 
eyebrows were carefully plucked and emphasized by black pencil, a light 
touch of rouge applied to the cheeks, all this he ightened their natural 
beauty; their heads were never covered, black silk stockings brocaded in 
rose covered their legs, they were agreeably shod in gray slippers attached by a pink bow. A cream -colored gauze cravat, very voluptuously tied, 
blended prettil y with a little lace ruffle; when the four of them were clad 
in this style, you may rest assured that nothing in all the world was as charming to behold as these little fellows.  Immediately they were granted their new privileges, a few others were 
abolishe d: all permissions, of the kind they had upon occasion been 
accorded in the morning, were absolutely refused now, but they were 
given all the rights over the wives the fuckers enjoyed: they could maltreat the women as they saw fit and not only at mealtime,  no, but at 
any time of the day, all the time, if they chose, and they could be confident that in any dispute arising ’ twixt the wives and themselves, 
their side would be heard with sympathy.  
These matters attended to, the usual searches were conducted; th e 
lovely Fanny, whom Curval had ordered to be in such and such a state, was found in the contrary one (the sequel will provide elucidation of this 
obscure point): her name was set down in the punishment ledger. 
Amongst the young gentlemen, Giton had done what he had been forbidden to do; down went his name. After the chapel functions had 
been completed by the very few subjects who were on hand to execute 
them, the friends went to dinner.  
This was the first meal at which the four lovers joined the friends at  
table. They took their places, each sitting to the right of the friend who 
doted upon him, the friend’s favorite fucker being seated to the friend’s 
left. These four additional guests lent a further charm to the meal; they 
were all four very gentle, very sweet, and were beginning to 
accommodate themselves very well to the general tone of the household. 
The Bishop, in the liveliest spirits that day, kissed Céladon virtually without interruption throughout the course of the meal, and as that child 
was a memb er of the quartet chosen to hand around the coffee, he left 
table a little before dessert. When Monseigneur, who had worked 
himself into a splendid sweat over the boy, saw him entirely naked in the 
salon, he lost all self -control.  “By Jesus!” he cried, his  face purple, “since I cannot tup his ass, I can 
at least do what Curval did to his bardash yesterday.”  
And so saying he seized the good- natured little rascal, laid him on his 
belly, and slipped his prick between his thighs. The libertine was lost in 
the c louds, his weapon’s hair rubbed the cute little hole he would fain 
have perforated: one of his hands fondled this delicious little cupid’s buttocks, with the other he frigged Céladon’s prick. What was more, he glued his mouth to the lovely child’s, pumped the air from his lungs, 
swallowed his saliva. In order to excite his brother, the Duc created a 
libertine spectacle by placing himself in front of the Bishop and proceeding to lick out the asshole of Cupidon, the other of the two boys 
serving coffee that d ay. Curval moved to within close range and had 
himself frigged by Michette, and Durcet offered the prelate the sight of 
Rosette’s widespread buttocks. Everyone toiled to procure him the 
ecstasy to which he plainly aspired; it occurred, his nerves trembled,  his 
teeth chattered, his eyes shone, he would have been a terrifying object 
for anyone save those three who knew full well the terrible effects joy 
had upon that man of God. The fuck finally broke forth and flowed over 
Cupidon’s buttocks, for that quick -witted little aide had at the last 
moment wriggled his way beneath his comrade so as to receive the 
treasure which might otherwise have gone entirely to waste.  
The storytelling hour came, they readied themselves. By an unusual 
stroke of circumstance, all th e fathers found their daughters beside them 
on their couches. But Messieurs were not alarmed. Duclos began to 
speak.  
In that you have not required me, Messieurs, to give you an exact day by 
day account of everything that happened to me at Madame Guérin’s establishment, but simply to relate the more out of the ordinary events which highlighted some of those days, I shall omit mention of several not very 
interesting episodes dating from my childhood, for they would be naught but 
tedious repetitions of what yo u have heard already. And so I shall tell you that 
I had just reached the age of sixteen, not without having acquired a wealth of 
experience in my métier, when it fell to my lot to have a libertine whose daily 
caprice merits to be cited. He was a sober, ve ry grave judge of nearly fifty 
years, a man who, if one is to believe Madame Guérin, who told me she had 
known him for many years, regularly exercised every morning the 
whimsicality wherewith I shall entertain you. His ordinary pimp had reached 
the age of retirement and recommended that the judge put himself in our dear mother’s hands; this was his first call at the house, and he began with me . 
He stationed himself, alone, in the room with the spy hole, I entered the 
other with a hod carrier, a Savoyard, I believe; well, he was a common fellow, but a healthy strapping one: those qualifications were enough for the judge, 
who cared nothing for age or looks. I was, within clear view and as near as 
possible to the hole, to frig my honest churl, who knew what was  expected of 
him and reckoned this a very pretty way indeed to earn his supper. After 
having unreservedly complied with all the instructions the good judge had 
given me, after having done all my sweet country buck could desire of me, I 
had him discharge in to a porcelain dish, and having wrung the last drop from 
his prick, I dashed into the adjoining room. My man is awaiting me in an 
ecstasy, he pounces  upon the dish, swallows the hot fuck, his own erupts; with 
one hand I encourage his ejaculation, with the other I collect in my hand every 
precious dram that falls and, between jets, quickly raising my hand to the old 
prankster’s mouth, with great dexterity and nimbleness I see to it that he 
swallows his own fuck quite as fast as he squirts it out . 
That was al l there was to it; no fingerings, no kisses, he didn’t even lift my 
skirts, and rising from his chair with just as much aplomb as a moment before he had been aroused, he took his cane and left, saying that I frigged very 
skillfully, so he considered, and t hat I had very well grasped his character. A 
new workman was brought in the next day, for they had to be changed daily, as had the women. My sister operated for him, he left content, returned again on the morrow, and during my entire stay at Madame Guérin’ s I never saw a 
single day go by without him arriving punctually at nine, and never did he raise a single skirt, although he was ministered by some charming girls . 
“Had he any inclination to see the commoner’s ass?” Curval wanted to 
know.  
“He had indeed, M onsieur le Président,” Duclos replied. “While 
amusing the man whose fuck he ate, one had to take great care to turn 
him this way and that, and the man had also to turn the girl around in 
every direction.”  
“Well, now,” said Curval, “that makes sense. But fo r that I’d not have 
understood a thing.”  
Shortly afterward , continued Duclos, the harem’s strength was increased 
by the arrival of a girl of about thirty, attractive enough, but with hair as red 
as Judas’. At first we thought she was a new recruit, but no, she quickly 
disabused us by explaining that she had come for only one party. The man for 
whom this latest heroine was intended soon arrived also: he was an important 
financier of prepossessing appearance, and his singularity of taste, since the girl 
set aside for him would doubtless not have been wanted by anyone else, this 
singularity, I say, gave me the greatest desire to observe them come to grips. No 
sooner had they entered the room than the girl  removed every stitch of her 
clothing and displayed a ver y fair and very plump body . 
“Very well, be off, jump about, skip,” said the financier, “you know perfectly 
well I like them in a sweat.”  And thereupon the redhead falls to cutting capers, running around the 
room, leaping like a young goat, and our man keep s his eye fixed on her while 
he frigs himself; these activities continued a great while and there was no 
telling to what they were leading. When the girl was swimming in perspiration, she approached the libertine, raised an arm, and had him smell 
her armpi t where sweat was dripping from every hair . 
“Ah, that’s it, that’s it!” cried the tycoon, staring with furious approval at 
that sticky arm she held a centimeter from his nose, “what an odor! ravishing!”  
Then slipping to his knees before her, he sniffed the  interior of her vagina, 
inhaling deeply, and then breathed in the scent emergent from her asshole, but 
he returned constantly to her armpits, whether because those parts flattered 
him the most, or because he found the bouquet superior, it was always there  his 
mouth and nose betook themselves with the greatest fervor. At last a rather 
lengthy but not very thick device, a device he had been buffeting in vain for 
above an hour, decided to wake and have a look about. The girl takes her 
place, the financier com es up from behind and lodges his anchovy under her 
armpit, she squeezes her arm, exerting what I judged must have been a 
powerful grip; meanwhile, her posture enables the gentleman to enjoy the sight 
and odor of her other armpit, he lays hands on it, burie s his snout under it and 
discharges while licking, while devouring this part which affords him such 
delight . 
“And the creature had to have red hair?” asked the Bishop. “That was 
a sine qua non?”  
“Absolutely,” Duclos replied. “Those women, as you are not unaware, 
Monseigneur, exude an infinitely more violent underarm aroma, and his 
sense of smell once stung, no question of it, by ripe odors, his pleasure 
organs would be aroused at once.”  “Of course,” the Bishop agreed. “But, by God, it seems to me I’d have 
preferred smelling that woman’s asshole to sniffing under her arms.”  
“Ah, ha!” spoke up Curval, “there is much to be said in favor of the 
one and the other, and let me assure you that if you’ll but give the arms a 
try, you’ll find them perfectly delicious.”  
“Which is to say, I take it,” said the Bishop, “that Monsieur le 
Président finds that stew to his taste?”  
“Why yes, I’ve sampled it,” Curval replied, “and apart from a few 
occasions when I added other episodes to that one, I protest to you that all by its elf it has always been able to get some fuck out of me.”  
“Oh yes, those episodes, I fancy what they were,” the Bishop broke in, 
“you smelled the ass …” 
“One moment there,” interrupted the Duc. “Don’t oblige him to make 
his confession, Monseigneur, he’d tell  us things we are not yet to hear; 
go on, Duclos, don’t let these chatterers encroach upon your domain.”  
I recall the period , our narrator resumed, when for more than six weeks 
Guérin absolutely forbade my sister to wash, requiring her, on the contrary, to  
keep herself in the rankest and most impure state she could contrive to be in; 
we had no inkling of the Madame’s designs until one day there arrived a grog -
blossomed old rake who, in a half -drunken and most uncouth tone, asked 
Guérin whether the whore was  ready. “Oh, my goodness, you may be sure she 
is,” Guérin replied. They are brought together, put in the room, I fly to the 
hole; scarcely am I there than I see my naked sister astride a capacious bidet 
filled with champagne and there is our man, armed wit h a great sponge, 
busily washing her and carefully recovering every bit of dirt that rolls from her 
body. 
It had been so long since she had cleaned any part of herself, for she had been 
strictly ordered not to wipe her behind, that the wine immediately too k on a brown and dirty hue, and probably an odor which could not have been very 
agreeable. But the more the wine became corrupted by the filth streaming into 
it, the more delighted our libertine grew. He sipped a little, found it exquisite, 
provided himsel f with a glass and, filling it to the brim six or seven times, he 
downed the putrid and disgusting wine in which he’d just finished washing a 
body laden for so long with impurities. When he had drunk his fill, he seized 
my sister, laid her down flat upon t he bed, and upon her buttocks and well -
opened hole, spewed floods of immodest semen brought to a boil by the unclean 
details of his unpleasant mania . 
But another visitor, a far nastier one, was time and again to attract my 
regard. We had in the house one o f those women who are called street scouts or 
trotters, to employ the bordello term, and whose function is to run abroad 
night and day and dig up new recruits. Over forty years old, this creature had, as well as very faded charms which had never been very winning, the dreadful 
defect that consists in stinking feet. And such, no other, was the fair sort 
whereof the Marquis de L*** was enamored. He arrives, Dame Louise—for such was her name —is introduced to him, he finds her superb, and once he has 
conducted her into the pleasure sanctuary, “Pray remove your shoes, “says he. 
Louise, who had been explicitly enjoined to wear the same stockings and 
slippers for a month, offers the Marquis a foot that would have made a man of 
less fine discrimination puke straight  off; but, as I say, that foot’s very filth 
and nauseous quality was precisely what our nobleman cherished most. He 
catches it up, kisses it with fervor, with his mouth he spreads each toe, one after 
the other, with his tongue he gathers from each space, a nd gathers with 
incomparable enthusiasm, the blackish and fetid scum Nature deposits there 
and which, with a little encouragement, easily increases by itself. Not only does 
he draw this unmentionable stuff into his mouth, but he swallows it, savors it, and the fuck he loses while frigging himself stands as unequivocal proof of the 
excessive pleasure he takes in this fare.  
“’Tis beyond me,” was the Bishop’s simple comment.  
“Then I suppose I’d best explain it to you,” Curval said.  
“What? You’ve a taste for th at?” 
“Observe,” the Président replied.  
The others rose, came from their niches, surrounded him, and beheld 
that peerless libertine, in whom were met all the tastes of the most 
crapulous lewdness, embrace the indescribable foot tendered him by 
Fanchon, that  aged and foul servant we described earlier. Curval was in 
half a swoon as he sucked.  
“There’s nothing to be wondered at there,” said Durcet, “one need but 
be mildly jaded, and all these infamies assume a richer meaning: satiety inspires them in the libert inage which executes them unhesitatingly. 
One grows tired of the commonplace, the imagination becomes vexed, and the slenderness of our means, the weakness of our faculties, the corruption of our souls lead us to these abominations.”  
Such must surely have been the case, Duclos went on, with the elderly 
General C***, one of Guérin’s most reliable clients. The women he required had to be damaged either by Nature, by libertinage, or by the effects of the law; in 
a word, he accepted none who were not one- eyed o r blind, lame, hunchbacked, 
legless cripples, or missing an arm or two, or toothless, or mutilated in their 
limbs, or whipped and branded or clearly marked by some other act of justice, 
and they always had to be of the ripest old age.  
At the scene I witnes sed he had been given a woman of about fifty, bearing 
the brand of a public thief, and who was, in addition, missing an eye. That double degradation figured as a treasure in his view. He closeted himself with her, had her strip away her clothes, ecstatical ly kissed the indubitable signs of 
crime on her shoulders, ardently sucked each ridge and furrow of those scars he 
called honorably won. That accomplished, he transferred his avid attentions to 
her asshole, he spread open her buttocks, appreciatively kissed the withered hole they defended, sucked it for what seemed an age, and then planting himself 
astride the old girl’s back, he rubbed his prick on the wounds that attested the 
triumph of justice, and as he rubbed, he praised her for having gone down in exemplary defeat; and then, bending over her bum, he showered further kisses 
upon the altar at which he had rendered such a lengthy homage, and squirted an abundance of fuck upon the inspiring marks which had so fired his own warrior’s spirit . 
“Oh, by God!” c ried Curval, whose brain was in a lubricious ferment 
that day, “look my friends, behold by the sign of this risen prick what a flame that passion described ignites in me.”  
And calling out to Desgranges:  
“Hither, impure buggeress ,” he continued in the same strain, “come, 
you who so resemble what we have just heard described; come, beget me 
the same pleasure the general got by her.”  
Desgranges approaches. Durcet, his friend in these excesses, helps the 
Président strip her. She raises a few objections at first ; they are the more 
certain and pursue their way, scolding her for wishing to hide something 
whereby she may be cherished all the more by the society. Her branded back comes to light at last, and there are a “T” and a “P” which affirm 
she has twice undergone the dishonoring ordeal whose vestiges 
nevertheless completely ignite our libertines’ impudicious urges.  
The rest of that worn and wasted body—that ass of parchment or 
ancient leather, that ample, noxious hole glistening in its center, this 
mutilated tit, those three vanished fingers, this short leg that causes her limp, that mouth destitute of teeth —everything combines to stimulate 
our libertine pair. Durcet sucks her from in front, Curval posteriorly, and 
even though objects of the greatest beauty and i n the best condition are 
there before their eyes and ready to brave anything in order to satisfy the 
least of their desires, even so it is with what Nature and villainy have 
dishonored, have withered, it is with the filthiest and least appetizing 
object our two rakes, presently beside themselves, are about to taste the most delicious pleasures …. Ah, now give me your explanations of 
man—here are two men who seem as if they were disputing what is nigh 
to a cadaver, like two savage mastiffs wrangling over a corpse; here, I say, we have two eminent citizens who, after having given themselves over to 
the foulest excesses, finally erupt their fuck, and notwithstanding the 
exhaustion caused by these feats, would very possibly go on to perform other ones of the same  crapulous and infamous kind, and perform them 
without an instant’s delay, were it not for the supper bell announcing other pleasures well worth their consideration.  
The Président, made desperate by his loss of fuck, and who in such 
cases could never be revived save by excessive feeding and swilling, flew 
to work and stuffed himself like a pig. Adonis frigged Invictus and gave 
him some fuck to drink, but hardly content with this latest outrage, 
which had been executed at once, Curval rose, said his imaginat ion 
proposed a few rather more delicious stunts, and without further 
explanation, led Fanchon, Adonis, and Hercule away with him to the 
further boudoir and did not reappear until the orgies; but then 
conducted himself so brilliantly that he was again able to commit a 
thousand fresh horrors, each more extraordinary than the other, but not, 
we regret, to be described to the reader, or rather not yet, for the 
structure of our tale obliges us to defer them.  And then to bed. Curval, the unfathomable Curval to wh om that 
night the divine Adelaide, his daughter, befell, Curval, who could have 
spent a most delightful night with her, was found the next morning 
squirming over the body of the disgusting Fanchon, with whom he had performed additional abominations all nig ht long, whilst Adonis and 
Adelaide, driven from his couch, were, one of them, in a little bed far away, and the other lying on a mattress upon the floor.    
THE SIXTH DAY  
It was Monseigneur’s turn to assist at the masturbations; he presented 
himself. Had Duclos’ disciples been males, Monseigneur would probably 
not have been able to resist them. But a little crack below the navel was a 
frightful blemish in his eyes, and had the Graces themselves encircled 
him, once he had caught sight of that imperfection nothing more would 
have been needed to calm him. And so he put up an indomitable 
defense, I even believe his prick remained limp, and the operations were 
continued.  
Nothing could be plainer than that Messieurs were extremely eager to 
find fault with the eig ht little girls so as to procure themselves the 
following day, which was the fatal Saturday of retribution, so as, I say, at this time to procure themselves the pleasure of punishing all eight. They 
had six already on the list; the sweet and beautiful Zelm ire made the 
seventh; did she in all good faith really merit correction? or was it simply 
that the pleasure of inflicting the proposed penalty won out in a struggle 
with strict equity? we leave the question to be decided by the wise 
Durcet’s conscience; our task is simply to record events. One very fair 
dame further swelled the miscreants’ ranks: ’twas  the gentle Adelaide. 
Durcet, her husband, appeared anxious to set an example by pardoning 
less in her than in the others, and it was he himself she happened to 
disappoint. He had led her to a certain place where the services she had 
been forced to render him, after certain of his functions, were something 
less than absolutely clean or palatable; not everyone is as depraved as 
Curval, and although Adelaide was his daughter, she had none of his 
tastes. She may have balked. Or she may have managed poorly. Or, again, it might only have been some teasing on Durcet’s part. Whatever 
the cause, she was inscribed upon the punishment list, to the vast 
satisfaction of nea rly all concerned.  
The examination of the boys’ quarters having unearthed nothing, the 
friends moved on to the arcane pleasures of the chapel, pleasures all the 
more piquant and all the more extraordinary in that even those who 
besought permission to come and procure them, were usually refused 
admittance. Constance, two subaltern fuckers, and Michette were the 
only ones to attend that morning’s party.  
At dinner, Zéphyr, of whom they were becoming prouder every day, 
what for the charms which seemed more and more to embellish him and 
the voluntary libertinage wherein he was making great strides, Zéphyr, I 
say, insulted Constance who, although no longer a waitress, nevertheless always appeared at the midday meal. He called her a baby- maker and 
struck her severa l blows in the belly to teach her, said he, to lay eggs with 
her lover, then he kissed the Duc, caressed him, gave his prick a few affectionate tugs, and managed so successfully to fire that hero’s brain 
that Blangis swore the afternoon would not pass with out his moistening 
Zéphyr with fuck; and the little rascal nagged the Duc, daring him to do 
it at once. As Zéphyr was to serve coffee, he left at dessert time and reappeared naked with the Duc’s cup. Instantly they were settled in the 
salon, the Duc, very animated, began with one or two smutty remarks; then sucked the child’s mouth and prick, set him on a chair, his ass at 
the level of his mouth, and earnestly pumped at his hole for fifteen 
minutes. His prick rebelled at last, dressed its lofty head, and th e Duc 
saw very clearly that the homage required some incense after all. 
However, their contract forbade everything save the expedient employed 
the day before; the Duc resolved therefore to emulate his associates. He had Zéphyr crouch on a sofa, drove his e ngine between the lad’s thighs, 
but what had befallen Curval happened also to the Duc: his device 
protruded half a foot beyond.  
“You’d best do as I did,” Curval advised, “frig the child against your 
prick, water your glans with his fuck.”  
But the Duc found  it more pleasant to impale two at the same time. 
He besought his brother to fit Augustine in place, her buttocks were 
pressed flush against Zéphyr’s thighs and the Duc, thus simultaneously 
fucking a boy and a girl, as it were, to put yet a little more of the 
lubricious into the thing, frigged Zéphyr’s prick on the pretty, round and fair buttocks of Augustine, and soaked them with that child -fuck which, 
as may easily be imagined, was mightily warmed by such treatment and soon spattered abundantly out.  
Curva l, who found the general perspective very inviting, and who 
spied the Duc’s ass, open wide and fairly yawning for a prick —as does 
the ass of every bugger at those instants his prick is up —Curval, I say, 
drew up to repay him in kind for what he had received  the previous 
evening, and the dear Duc no sooner felt the voluptuous joltings 
occasioned by this intromission, than his fuck, taking wing at almost the 
same time Zéphyr’s departed him, splashed the lower edges of the 
temple whose columns Zéphyr was wetting. But Curval did not 
discharge, and withdrawing his proud and mettlesome engine from the Duc’s bum, he menaced the Bishop, who was likewise frigging himself 
between Giton’s thighs, threatening to make him undergo the fate the 
Duc had just experienced. The  Bishop hurls a challenge, ’tis  accepted, 
battle is joined, the Bishop is embuggered and, between the thighs of the 
pretty child he is caressing, goes on deliciously to lose a draught of 
libertine fuck most deliciously wheedled out of him. However, a benev olent spectator to it all, Durcet, having no one but Hébé and the 
duenna to attend to his needs, and although nearly dead drunk, was by 
no means wasting his opportunities and was quietly perpetrating 
infamies the proper time has not yet come to disclose. But calm finally descended over the field, the warriors slumbered, and woke again at six, 
the hour when Duclos’ gifted tongue was to lay the foundation for new 
pleasures.  
The quatrains that evening featured certain sexual changes: that is to 
say, all the gi rls were costumed as sailors, the little boys as tarts; the 
effect was ravishing, nothing quickens lust like this voluptuous little reversal; adorable to find in a little boy what causes him to resemble a 
girl, and the girl is far more interesting when for  the sake of pleasing she 
borrows the sex one would like her to have. Each friend had his wife on 
his couch that day; they exchanged congratulations upon that very 
religious arrangement, and everyone being ready to listen, Duclos 
resumed her lewd stories.  
There was, at Madame Guérin’s, a certain girl of about thirty, blond, 
rather heavy -set, but unusually fair and healthy; her name was Aurore, she 
had a charming mouth, fine teeth, and a voluptuous tongue, but —and who 
would believe such a thing? —whether beca use of a faulty education, or owing 
to a weak stomach, from that adorable mouth there used constantly, incessantly to erupt prodigious quantities of wind, and above all after she had eaten a hearty meal, she was capable, for the space of an hour, of blowin g a stream of 
belches powerful enough to turn a windmill. But they are right who declare no 
fault exists that is not a little appreciated by someone, and our fine lass, thanks 
to this one, had one of the most ardent suitors: he was a learned and grave 
professor of Scholasticism at the Sorbonne who, tired of wasting his time 
proving the existence of God in his school, would sometimes come to our brothel to convince himself of the existence of his dear God’s creatures. He would send 
prior notice of his intend ed arrival, and Aurore would feed like one dying of 
hunger. Curious to see that pious colloquy, I fly to the spy hole: my lovers greet one another, I observe a few preliminary caresses all directed upon the mouth, then most delicately our rhetor seats his companion in a chair, seats himself 
opposite her and, taking her hands, deposits his relics between them, sad old 
vestiges they were, in the most deplorable state . 
“Act,” he enjoins her, “act, my lovely one. Act; you know by what means I 
may be drawn from this languid condition, I beg you to adopt them with all dispatch, for I feel myself pressed mightily to proceed.”  
With one hand she fondles the doctor’s flabby tool, with the other she draws 
his head to hers, glues her lips to his mouth and in no time at all she has, one after another, shot sixty great belches down his gullet. Impossible to represent the ecstasy of this servant of God; he was in the clouds, he inhaled, he 
swallowed everything that came his way, you’d have thought the very idea of 
losing th e least puff of air would have distressed him, and whilst all this was 
going on, his hands roamed inquiringly over my colleague’s breasts and under 
her petticoat, but these fingerings were no more than episodic; the unique and 
capital object was that mouth  overwhelming him with sighs and digestive 
rumblings. His prick finally enlarged by the voluptuous vibrations the 
ceremony caused to be born in him, he discharged into my companion’s hand, 
and ran off to deliver a lecture, protesting as he went that never had he enjoyed himself more . 
Some time after this, a rather more extraordinary man came to the house 
with a particular problem in mind, and it well deserves to be mentioned in 
this catalogue of natural wonders. Guérin had, that day, urged me to eat, had 
all but forced me to eat as copiously as, not long before, I had seen Aurore dine. 
Guérin took care to have me served everything she knew I liked best, and having forewarned me, as we rose from table, of everything I should have to 
do for the elderly liberti ne with whom she intended to match me, she had me 
swallow down three grains of emetic dissolved in a glass of warm water. The old sinner arrived, he was a brothel -hound I had seen dozens of times before 
without bothering to find out what he came to do. He embraces me, drives a 
dirty and disgusting tongue into my mouth, and the action of the emetic I’d 
drunk is complemented by his stinking breath. He sees my stomach’s about to rise, he’s in an ecstasy. “Courage, dearie,” he cries, “be brave, never fear, I do n’t 
propose to lose a drop of it.” Being foreadvised of all he expects of me, I seat him on the couch, lay his head to rest on the edge of it; his thighs are separated, I unbutton his breeches, drag out a slack, stunted instrument that betrays no 
sign of s tiffening, I shake, squeeze, pull it, he opens his mouth: all the while 
frigging him, all the while receiving the touches of his impudicious hands 
which stray over my buttocks, at point- blank I launch into his mouth the 
imperfectly digested dinner that vom itive has fetched up from my stomach. 
Our man is beside himself, he rolls his eyes, pants, bolts down the spew, goes to my lips to seek more of the impure ejaculation that intoxicates him, he does not 
indeed miss a drop, and when it seems to him the operat ion is in danger of 
ending, he provokes a repetition of it by dexterously inserting his appalling 
tongue into my mouth, and his prick, that prick I’ve scarcely been able to touch because of my convulsive retchings, that prick doubtless warmed by nothing 
but such infamies, grows purple, rises up of itself, and weeps into my fingers 
the unsuspected proof of the impressions these foul activities have made upon it . 
“Ah, by God’s balls,” said Curval, “that’s a very delicious passion 
indeed, but none the less sus ceptible of improvement.”  
“And how?” asked Durcet in a voice broken by signs of lubricity.  
“How?” Curval repeated, “why, by the choice of food and of partner.”  
“Partner? Oh, but of course. You’d prefer a Fanchon.”  “To be sure!”  
“And the food?” Durcet continued, while Adelaide frigged him.  
“Food?” the Président murmured, “why, I think I’d force her to give 
me back, and in the same manner, what I’d just introduced into her.”  
“That is to say,” stammered the financier, beginning to lose all control 
of himself, “you’d spew into her mouth, she’d swallow and then have to 
blow it back at you?”  
“Precisely.”  
And each rushing into his closet, the Président with Fanchon, 
Augustine, and Zélamir; Durcet with Desgranges, Rosette, and Invictus: proceedings were halted for roughly thirty minutes. Then the two 
lechers returned.  
“Ah,” the Duc said chidingly to Curval, the first to reappear, “you’ve 
been up to some nastiness or other.”  
“Ah, a little of this, a little of that,” the Président replied, “it’s my life’s 
happiness, yo u know. I’ve not much patience with mild or tidy pleasures”  
“But I trust you were also purged of a little fuck?”  
“Enough of that nonsense,” the Président said, “do you suppose 
everyone is like you, flinging fuck this way and that every six minutes? 
Why no,  I leave those efforts and that unconscionable prodigality to you 
and to vigorous champions like Durcet,” he went on, watching the financier stagger wearily from his closet.  
“Yes,” said Durcet, “yes, it’s true, there was no resisting the girl. 
Desgranges i s so filthy in word, deed, and body, she is so adroit, so 
suitable in every way …” 
“Well, Duclos,” the Duc said, “go on with your story, for if we don’t 
quiet him down, the indiscreet little fellow will tell us everything he did, and never once consider wha t a dreadful breach of good manners it is to 
boast of the favors one has received from a pretty woman.”  
And Duclos obediently returned to her tale.  
Since , said our chronicler, these gentlemen are so fond of that kind of 
drollery, I greatly regret they were  unable to restrain their enthusiasm yet 
another minute, for the effects of what I have still to relate this evening might, 
it seems to me, have better found their mark. Precisely that which Monsieur le Président declared to be lacking to the perfection of  the passion I have just 
described was entirely present in the one that follows; what a pity, I repeat, that I was unable to get to it in time. The example of the elderly Président de 
Saclanges affords, in every particular and word for word, all the singul arity 
Monsieur de Curval appeared to desire. By way of a partner for him, Guérin 
had chosen the dean of our chapter: a tall, sturdy lass of about thirty -six, a 
great and chronic drunk, loutish, foul -mouthed, rather a fishmonger’s wife, 
although by no means  unattractive; the good Président arrives, they are served 
supper, both get blind drunk, both become unreasonable, one vomits in the other’s mouth, the one swallows the stuff, then the other vomits into the mouth 
of the first, now he swallows, and so forth  and so on, and they finally collapse 
into the supper’s debris, that is to say, into the filth they’ve just splashed all 
over the floor. And then I am sent into the fray, for my co -worker has not an 
ounce of strength left, indeed she has lost consciousness. But this, however, is the crucial moment from the libertine’s point of view: I find him prone, his prick straight and hard as a crowbar; I seize his instrument, the Président 
stammers, swears, draws me to him, sucks my mouth, and discharges like a 
bull, the while twisting and turning and continuing to wallow in his ordure . 
The same girl, somewhat later, participated in a drama which was surely 
not much less filthy; a monk of some consequence, who paid her very liberally, 
threw himself astride her belly af ter having spread and immobilized my companion’s thighs by tying them to heavy articles of furniture. Several kinds 
of food were brought in and served the monk, who had the dainties placed on 
the girl’s naked belly. The merry fellow then picks up the morsels he is to eat, 
and dips them one by one in his Dulcinea’s open cunt, and only  consumes them 
after they have been completely impregnated with the spices the vagina 
secretes . 
“Ha!” cried the Bishop, “an entirely novel manner of dining.”  
“And one which woul dn’t suit you, eh, my Lord?” said Duclos.  
“By God’s belly, no!” replied the man of the Church, “I’m not that 
fond of the cunt.”  
Very well , our storyteller replied, lend an ear to the item with which I am 
going to close this evening’s narrations, I am persu aded it will amuse you 
more. 
I had been with Madame Guérin for eight years —had just reached the age 
of seventeen —and during this period not a day had passed without my seeing 
a certain farmer -general arrive at the house every morning and be received 
with t he warmest welcome. He was thought very highly of by the 
management; a man of roughly sixty, rotund, short, he resembled Monsieur 
Durcet in a good many points. Like Monsieur, he had an air of freshness and youth, and was also plump; he required a different  girl every day, and those of 
the house were never used save in emergencies or when someone contracted abroad failed to meet her appointment. Monsieur Dupont, so was our financier called, was just as discriminating in his choice of girls as he was 
fastidio us in his tastes, he simply would not have a whore to attend to his 
needs except in the rare and extreme cases I mentioned; he had to have, on the 
contrary, working women, shopgirls, especially milliners or seamstresses. Their 
age and coloring also had to meet specification: they had to be between fifteen and eighteen, neither more nor less, and, most important of all, they needed to 
have a sweetly molded ass, an ass so absolutely clean that the least blemish, a 
mere grain of matter clinging at the hole was  sufficient grounds for rejection. 
When they were maids, he paid twice as much . 
They had made plans for, and were that day actually expecting the arrival 
of, a young lacemaker of sixteen whose ass was generally acclaimed by 
connoisseurs as a true model of what an ass should be; Monsieur Dupont did not know the treasure that was to be offered him, and as it turned out the 
young lady had word sent that on this particular morning she was unable to 
leave her parents’ house and that matters would have to proceed  without her. 
Guérin, knowing Dupont had never set eyes on me, ordered me to dress in a 
shopgirl’s costume at once, to go out, take a cab at the end of the street, and 
alight again at the brothel, all this fifteen minutes after Dupont entered the house; I was to play my role with care and pass myself for a milliner’s 
apprentice. But the most important consideration of all was the anise water: I 
was to fill my stomach at once with half a quart of it, and directly afterward I was to drink the large glass of balsamic liqueur she gave me; you shall shortly 
learn for what its effect was intended. Everything went forward very 
smoothly; fortunately, we had been given several hours’ notice, and in this 
time were able to make thorough preparations. I arrived at the h ouse with a 
very silly air, I was presented to the financier who directly scrutinized me very 
closely, but as I was keeping a sharp eye on my conduct, he could discover nothing about my person which might contradict the story that had been 
invented for him . 
“Is she a maid?” Dupont asks.  
“Not in that place,” says Guérin, pointing to my belly, “but I will answer 
for the other side.”  And it was a most impudent lie she told. Little does it matter; our man 
believed her, and that alone was necessary . 
“Lift your s kirts, hurry it up,” says Dupont . 
And Guérin raises my skirts from behind, drawing me toward her as she 
does so and thus entirely exposing the temple at which the libertine performed 
his worship. He stares, for a moment he fingers my buttocks, he spreads t hem 
with both hands, and evidently satisfied, he announces that the ass is suitable 
for his purposes. Next, he asks me several questions relating to my age, my 
trade, and content with my feigned innocence and the look of having been 
born yesterday that I a ffect, he has me accompany him to his apartment, for 
there was one reserved exclusively for him at Guérin’s: he did not like being 
observed while at work, he was certain not to be in this place. Both of us 
having entered, he carefully shuts and secures the  door, considers me for a 
moment, then in a rather brutal fashion—brutality characterized him 
throughout the scene —he inquired whether it were indeed true that I had 
never been fucked in the ass. As my role called for total ignorance of the 
meaning of such  an expression, I had him repeat it, declared I still understood  
nothing, and when by means of the most unambiguous gestures he conveyed 
what he wished to say, I replied, with a simulated look of fright and modesty, 
that I should be a very unhappy girl ind eed if ever I had lent myself to such 
infamies. Whereupon he told me to remove my skirts, but only my skirts, and once I had obeyed him, leaving my blouse down to hide my front, he raised it 
above my buttocks to the height of my bodice; but while he was un dressing me 
my neckerchief slipped down, revealing my breasts. He became incensed . 
“Devil take those damned tits of yours,” he cried; “who asked you for tits? 
That’s what I can’t bear about these creatures, every single impudent one of 
them is wild to show  you her miserable bubs.”  Hastening to cover them over, I approached him to beg his pardon, but 
observing that I was going to exhibit my cunt thanks to the posture I was 
about to assume, he lost his temper a second time : 
“But, sweet Jesus! Can’t you stay p ut?” he demanded, seizing my haunches 
and turning me so that there was no danger he would catch a glimpse of 
anything but my ass, “stay that way, fuck your eyes, I don’t care any more for 
your cunt than I do for your chest, your ass is all you need with me .” 
So saying, he stood up and guided me to the edge of the bed upon which he 
installed me in such wise the upper half of my body rested on the bed, then, seating himself on a very low stool, he found himself situated between my wide -flung legs and his head  on a level with my ass. He peers at me for 
another instant, then, deciding I am not yet adjusted as I ought to be, up he gets, fetches a cushion, fits it under my belly, thus arching my ass more sharply; he sits down again, examines, and goes about everyt hing with the  sangfroid 
and confidence of the seasoned and mature libertine. A moment passes, then he grasps my two buttocks, spreads them, poses his open mouth upon the hole, fastens his lips hermetically to it, and immediately, pursuant to the signal he 
gives me and in obedience to the considerable pressure that has built up within 
me, I unleash a booming fart, possibly the most explosive one he has received in 
all his life; it shoots down his gullet and he backs away, furious . 
“What the devil !” he cries,  “so you are so bold as to fart into my mouth, are 
you?” 
And he straightway claps his mouth to my asshole again . 
“Yes, Monsieur,” I say as I release a second stifler, “that’s how I deal with 
gentlemen who kiss my ass.”  
“Very well then! fart, if you must, y ou little rascal, since you can’t help it, 
fart, I say, fart as hard as you like and as often as you can.”  From this moment onward I cast off all restraint, nothing can express the 
urgency of my desire to give vent to the boisterous winds produced by the 
potion I had drunk earlier; our man is thrilled by them, he receives some in his 
mouth, the others in his nostrils. After fifteen minutes of this exercise, he lies down upon the couch, draws me to him, his nose still wedged between my 
buttocks, orders me to  frig him and meanwhile to continue a ceremony which 
gives rise in him to such exquisite pleasures. I fart, I frig, I manipulate a slack 
little prick neither much longer nor much thicker than my finger, but by dint of 
buffets, jerks, and farts the instrume nt finally stiffens. The augmentation of 
our gentleman’s pleasure, the critical instant’s approach is announced by a new 
iniquity: it is now his tongue that provokes my farts, ’tis  his tongue that, like a 
flail, darts deep into my anus in order to stir up the winds, ’tis  against his 
tongue he wants me to blow those zephyrs, he becomes unreasonable, he is no longer in possession of his wits, ’tis  clear, and his wretched little engine sadly 
sprinkles seven or eight drops of watery, brownish sperm upon my fing ers; and 
now he is restored to his senses. But as his native brutality fomented his distraction, so now it replaces it at once, and he barely gives me enough time to 
readjust myself. He scolds, he mutters and swears, in one word he offers me the 
abhorrent image of vice that has slaked its thirst, and I am made the butt of 
that unthinking indelicacy which, once its glitter has paled, seeks to find 
revenge in scorn for the worshiped object that latterly captivated the senses . 
“Now that’s a man I prefer to all  the others,” said the Bishop. “And do 
you know if he had his little sixteen- year-old apprentice the next day?”  
“Yes, Monseigneur, he did indeed, and the day after that a maid of 
fifteen far prettier yet. As few men used to pay as much, few were better 
served.”  
This passion having stimulated heads so well acquainted with that 
species of disorder, and having put them in mind of a taste they all relished, Messieurs simply could not bear waiting any longer to make use 
of it. Each of them plucked what windy fru its there were to be had, 
neglecting no likely sources, then supper arrived, with their gourmandizing pleasures they blended nearly all the infamies they had just heard described, the Duc got Fanchon tipsy and had the befuddled 
old thing vomit into his mouth, Durcet had the whole harem fart, and in 
the course of the evening swallowed at least threescore mouthfuls of unwholesome air. As for Curval, in whose brain all kinds of 
extravagances danced gaily, he declared he was moved to perform some 
solitary orgie s and went off to the remote boudoir, accompanied by 
Fanchon, Marie, Desgranges, and thirty bottles of Champagne wine. 
Later on, all four had to be carried back into society, for they were 
discovered floating in a very tide of their own ordures, and the Pr ésident 
was found asleep, his mouth fastened to that of Desgranges, who was 
still wearily retching into it. The three other friends aquitted themselves 
no less brilliantly, performing feats in like kind or somewhat different; they too had spent their orgy period drinking, they had besotted their 
little ministers and lapped up their vomit, they had got the little girls to 
fart, I truly haven’t space to tell you all they did, and had it not been for 
Duclos, who coolly kept her wits about her, who when it was abandoned 
by the others assumed the government of the revels, preserved order, and 
put the merrymakers to bed, I repeat that had it not been for Duclos, it is very probable indeed that rosy- fingered Dawn, opening the gates of 
Apollo’s palace, would have found them lying still plunged in their excrements, rather more after the example of swine than like heroes.  
Needful only of rest, each lay by himself that night, and cradled in 
Morpheus’ arms, recovered a little strength for the strenuous new day ahead.    
THE SEVENTH DAY  
The friends had ceased to participate in Duclos’ nine o’clock lessons. 
Wearied from the night’s riot, fearing, furthermore, lest some operation might result in loss of fuck at that very early hour, and esteeming, finally, 
that this ceremony  was accelerating their indifference to joys and to 
objects whose interest and integrity it was surely to their advantage to 
preserve for a while, they agreed that instead of one of themselves, one 
of the fuckers would hereafter take his turn at the morning exercises.  
The inspection and searches were conducted, only one little girl was 
wanting to make all eight of them eligible for correction, and she was the lovely and intriguing Sophie, a child accustomed to fulfilling all her 
duties; however ridiculous t hey may have seemed to her, she respected 
them none the less, but Durcet, who had earlier conferred with Louison, 
her governess, so artfully caused her to tumble into the snare that she 
was declared to be at fault and was as a consequence added to the fatal register. The sweet Aline, equally subjected to close scrutiny, was also 
judged guilty, and so it was that the evening’s list contained mention of 
the eight little girls, four of the little boys, and two from among the 
wives.  
These tasks accomplished, Me ssieurs concentrated their thoughts 
upon the marriage highlighting the festival that marked the end of the 
first week. No chapel permissions were granted that day, Monseigneur 
clad himself pontifically, they betook themselves to the altar. The Duc, 
representing the bride’s father, and Curval, who represented the young 
groom’s, led forth Michette and Giton. Both were extraordinarily 
arrayed in the most formal dress, but also reversedly, that is to say, the little boy was costumed as a girl, the little girl w ore boy’s clothes. We 
regret to say that the sequence we originally established for the treatment 
of our matter obliges us to postpone yet a little longer the pleasure the 
reader will doubtless take in learning the details of this religious ceremony; but t he appropriate moment for disclosing them will surely 
arrive, and probably fairly soon.  
Messieurs passed into the salon. It was while awaiting the hour of 
dinner our four libertines, encloseted with that charming little couple, 
had them remove their clothi ng, and obliged them mutually to perform 
everything in the sphere of matrimonial ritual their age permitted, with 
the single exception of the introduction of the virile member into the 
little girl’s vagina, which introduction could perfectly well have been 
effected, for the boy stiffened very satisfactorily, but he was held in check in order that nothing might happen to spoil a flower destined for 
plucking by others. But, apart from that, they were allowed to finger and 
caress one another; young Michette polluted her little husband and Giton, aided by his masters, frigged his little wife as nicely as you please. 
However, they were both beginning to realize full well the bondage they 
were in, and this recognition prevented voluptuous joy, even that joy 
their young years permitted them to experience, from being born in their 
little hearts.  
They dined, the bride and groom assisted at the wedding feast, but at 
coffee, heads having waxed hot over them, they were stripped naked, as 
were Zélamir, Cupidon, Rosette, a nd Colombe, who were serving 
coffee. Thigh -fuckery having become fashionable at this time of day, 
Curval laid hands on the husband, the Duc captured his bride, and the two men enthighed the couple on the spot. The Bishop, who since 
coffee had been brought in had taken a liking to him, now fell ravenously upon the charming Zélamir’s behind, which he tongued, 
sucked, and whence he elicited farts, and he soon managed to transpierce 
the little fellow in the same way, while Durcet committed his preferred 
little villainies upon Cupidon’s charming behind. Our two principal 
athletes did not discharge; one of them soon had Rosette in his clutches, 
the other Colombe, they slipped their pricks between the children’s legs 
and, just as they had with Michette and Giton, o rdered them to frig, 
with their pretty little hands and in accordance with the instruction they 
had been receiving, those monstrous prick ends thrusting beyond their 
crotches and out into space; and while the youngsters toiled away, the libertines comforta bly fingered their helpers’ delicious, fresh little 
assholes. And still no fuck shed; Messieurs knew full well what delicious chores lay ahead that evening, they proceeded circumspectly. The young couple’s privileges were abrogated, their marriage, althoug h made in 
keeping with every formality, became no more than a jest; they each of them returned to their quatrains, and the company established itself in the auditorium. Duclos took up her story.  
A man with more or less the same predilections as the financi er whose 
exploits terminated yesterday evening’s recital shall be the athlete with whom, may it please your Lordships, today’s shall begin. He was a crown attorney of 
some sixty years and not only were his eccentricities unusual, but for practicing 
them he  would have none but women older than he. Guérin gave him one of 
her friends, an aged procuress whose withered buttocks bore a powerful likeness 
to a crumple of old parchment being used to keep tobacco moist. Such, 
notwithstanding, was to be the object emp loyed for our libertine’s offerings. He 
knelt down before that decrepit bum and kissed it lovingly; farts were blown 
up his nose, he waxed ecstatic, opened his mouth, the lady opened her vent, his 
tongue went enthusiastically in quest of the mellow winds s oughing in that tunnel. He could not resist the delirium into which the operation was plunging 
him. From his breeches he has brought out an ancient, pale, shriveled little 
device, an object as ill -favored as the one he deifies. “Ah! Fart, my old sweetie, 
fart thoughtlessly, fart abundantly,” he cries, frigging himself with all his 
strength. “Fart, my love, for only thy little farts will break the spell binding 
this slumbering prince.” The procuress redoubles her efforts, and, drunk with 
joy, the libertine s urrenders his burden: between his goddess’ legs fall two or 
three unhappy droplets of the sperm responsible for the whole of his delight . 
O terrible effect of example!  Who would have believed it? At the very 
same instant, and quite as if they had received a signal, all four of our 
libertines individually summon the duenna of their quadrilles. They lay 
eager hands upon those foul and rammy asses, solicit farts, obtain them, 
and are fully prepared to be just as happy as the crown attorney, but restrain themselves, for they remember the pleasures awaiting them at 
the orgies; whereupon they dismiss each his Venus, and Duclos 
continues:  
I shall lay little emphasis upon the following passion, said that amiable 
creature, for I realize that there are not many in you r midst, Messieurs, who 
are its votaries; however, you have commanded me to tell everything, and I obey. A very young man, a young man with a very handsome face, used to find 
it vastly amusing to lick out my cunt once a month, and at a certain period. I 
would be lying on my back, my legs flung wide, he used to kneel in front of me 
and suck, with both hands lifting my flanks so as to bring my cunt to within 
easy reach. He swallowed both fuck and blood, for he managed so adroitly, 
worked with such good will, and was such a pretty lad I used to discharge. He 
would frig himself, would be in seventh heaven, nothing evidently could 
afford him so much pleasure, and the hottest, the most ardent discharge, performed while in action, used always to convince me of his high humor. The 
following day he would usually see Aurore, not long afterward it would be my 
sister, and in the course of the month he would pass us all in review, and he 
doubtless made the rounds of every other whorehouse in Paris at the same time . 
But, M essieurs, I believe you will concur in my judgment when I say that 
the aforementioned caprice is no more singular than that of another gentleman, an old friend of Guérin, who had been furnishing him for years. She assured us that all his joy consisted in e ating expelled ovulations and in 
lapping up miscarriages; he would be notified whenever a girl found herself in that case, he would rush to the house and swallow the embryo, half swooning with satisfaction . 
“I knew that particular man,” said Curval. “His e xistence and his 
tastes are as authentic as anything else in the world.”  
“Perhaps,” said the Bishop. “And I know something just as certain as 
your man, and that is I’d not imitate him.”  
“And why, pray tell?” asked the Président. “I am convinced it would 
produce a lively discharge, and were Constance to grant me her kind 
permission, for I hear she’s gravid now, why, I can promise her I’ll fetch 
Monsieur her son along before he’s fully done, and I’ll toss him off like a sardine.”  
“Oh, all the world knows your  horror of pregnant women,” cried 
Constance, “and everyone also knows you only got rid of Adelaide’s mother because she conceived a second time, and if Julie were to take my 
advice, she’d be careful.”  
“Why yes, ’tis  perfectly true that I am not fond of progeny,” quoth 
Curval, “and that when the beast is laden it quickens a furious loathing in me, but to imagine I killed my wife on that account is to be gravely 
mistaken. Bitch that you are, get it into your head that I have no need of reasons in order to kil l a woman, above all a bitch that, were she mine, 
I’d very surely keep from whelping.”  
Constance and Adelaide fell to weeping, and this brief dialogue 
revealed something of the secret hatred the Président bore for the 
charming wife of the Duc who, for his part, very far from supporting her 
in the discussion, replied to Curval, saying that he ought perfectly well to 
know that he, Blangis, was equally ill -disposed  to offspring, and that 
although Constance was pregnant, she had not yet given birth. And at 
this point Constance’s tears flowed all the faster; she was on her father’s 
couch, and Durcet, not taxing himself to comfort her, advised his 
daughter that if she did not cease her blubbering that instant, her state 
notwithstanding, he was going to boot her as s out of the auditorium. 
The hapless creature shed inwardly upon her heart the tears wherewith 
she was reproached, and was content to say: “Alas, Great God! very 
wretched am I, but ’tis  my fate, I must endure it.” Adelaide, who had 
also been weeping away on the Duc’s couch and whose distress the Duc 
had been moving heaven and earth to increase, also managed to dry her 
tears, and this scene, somewhat tragical although very mirthful to our 
four libertines’ villainous souls, ground to an end, and Duclos resume d 
her tale:  
In Guérin’s establishment there was a room most curiously constructed, and 
it was always used by one man. It had a double floor, and this narrow 
between -stories area, where there was only  space enough to lie down, served to 
lodge the uncommon b reed of libertine in the interests of whose passion I had 
regular employment. He would take a girl and, descending through a trap door, would lie down and arrange himself in such a manner his head was 
directly below a hole that had been bored in the floor above; the girl 
accompanying him had the single chore of frigging him, and I, located above, had simply to do the same thing for a second man. The hole, obscure and 
seemingly a natural flaw in the planks, remained uncovered as if through 
negligence, and I,  acting at the behest of tidiness, eager to avoid spotting the 
floor, would while manualizing my man direct his fuck so that it fell through 
the hole and, consequently, upon the face of the gentleman below. It was all 
managed with such skill nothing seemed  out of place, and the operation would 
be a success each time: at the moment the fuck frigged from the person above 
splashed upon the nose of the person being frigged below, the latter would 
unleash his own, and that was all there was to it . 
However, the elderly dame I mentioned not long ago reappeared, but she 
was to be pitted against a different champion. This new one, a man of about 
fifty, had her remove her clothes and then licked out every orifice in her old 
corpse: ass, cunt, mouth, nostrils, armpits,  ears, he omitted nothing, and with 
each sucking the rascal swallowed whatever he obtained. And he went further 
still, he had her chew slices of pastry which he would then have out of her 
mouth and into his, and swallow. He would have her keep mouthfuls of  wine 
she had gargled or swished about, he would have them from her, and drink 
them too; and all the while his prick would be so furiously erected that the fuck 
seemed ready to fly all unaided. Finally he would sense the crucial instant’s 
arrival and, hurl ing himself upon the crone, he would thrust his tongue at 
least six inches into her asshole and discharge like a madman . 
“Ah, by God!” said Curval, “will you now say that youth and pretty 
looks are indispensable to an elicitation of fuck? Why, once again ’ tis the 
filthy act that causes the greatest pleasure: and the filthier it be, the more voluptuously fuck is shed.”  
“Those are the piquant salts,” Durcet concurred, “which as they are 
exhaled from the object serving our lust, enter us and irritate our anima l 
spirits, put them in a commotion; well now, who is it doubts that everything derelict, maculate, or stinking secretes a greater quantity of 
these salts and hence has a greater capacity for stimulating and 
determining our discharge?”  
This thesis was sober ly discussed for a little while; as there was a 
quantity of work to be done after supper, it was served earlier than was 
customary, and at dessert the little girls, every one of them condemned 
to do penance, departed for the salon where they were to be corrected together with the four boys and the two wives who also lay under 
sentence. That made fourteen victims: the eight girls, whose names the 
reader knows, Adelaide and Aline, and four youths: Narcisse, Cupidon, Zélamir, and Giton. Already drunk with anticipation of the particular 
delight that was awaiting them and of which they were incredibly fond, 
they completed their intoxication by imbibing a prodigious amount of wine and liqueurs, and then removed to the salon where the patients 
were awaiting them, a nd such was Messieurs’ common state, so besotted 
were they, in such lecherous fury did they enter, that there is surely no 
one in the wide world who would have wished to exchange places with 
those unlucky culprits.  
Attendance at the orgies was that day con fined to the delinquents and 
the four elders who were there as servants; everyone was naked, everyone trembled, everyone was weeping and wondering what to expect when the 
Président, taking his seat in a tall armchair, bade Durcet announce the name of each criminal, and cite his offense. Durcet’s face was as wrathful 
as his colleague’s, he took up the register and undertook to read from it, 
but encountered difficulties and was unable to proceed; the Bishop came 
to his rescue, and although quite as drunk as t he banker, held his wine 
with greater success and in a loud voice read one after the other the 
names of the guilty and their faults; and after each citation the Président pronounced sentence in keeping with the physical faculties and age of 
the criminal, b ut the punishment decreed was in every instance severe all 
the same. This ceremony concluded, punishment was inflicted. We are in despair, for here we are once again forced by the design of our history to make a little detour: yes, we must for the time bei ng omit describing 
those lubricious corrections, but our readers will not hold it against us; they appreciate our inability to give them complete satisfaction at the present moment; but they can be sure of it, their time will come.  
The ceremony lasted a ve ry long time. There were fourteen subjects to 
punish, and some very pleasant episodes interrupted the proceedings. No doubt of it, everything was delicious, for our scoundrels discharged, all 
four of them, and retired so weary, so drunk with wine and pleas ure, that 
had it not been for the four fuckers who came to fetch them, they might 
not have reached their chambers where, despite all they had just 
accomplished, further lewd exploits were performed.  
The Duc, who had Adelaide for his bed companion that nigh t, did 
not want her. She had been one of the delinquents punished, and punished so well by him that he, having poured out every drop of his 
fuck in her honor, had no more need of her that evening and, 
relegating her to a mattress on the floor, he gave her place to Duclos, 
more firmly installed in his good graces than ever.    
THE EIGHTH DAY  
The previous day’s examples having made a deep impression, no one was 
found, no one could be found wanting the next day. The lessons continued, they were executed upon t he fuckers, and as the day produced 
no outstanding event until coffee, we will begin our account with that 
little rite. Coffee was served by Augustine, Zelmire, Narcisse, and 
Zéphyr. The thigh -fuckeries began again, Curval laid hands on Zelmire, 
the Duc on Augustine, and after having admired and kissed their pretty 
buttocks which, I truly don’t know why, that day possessed a charm, an attraction, a blush of vermilion the friends had not hitherto remarked, 
after, I say, our libertines had thoroughly kissed and caressed those 
exquisite little asses, farts were elicited from them; the Bishop, who had 
Narcisse in his grip, had already procured himself some, Zéphyr’s could 
be heard spluttering into Durcet’s mouth —why not imitate them? 
Zelmire succeeded, but Augus tine had striven with might and main, the 
Duc had threatened her with another Saturday martyrdom, with punishment as severe as what she had just suffered the day before, but 
strains and struggles, menaces and imprecations were all in vain, nothing 
emerged from the poor little creature, she was already in tears when a 
driblet at length appeared and satisfied the Duc who inhaled the aroma 
and, highly pleased with this mark of docility in the pretty child of 
whom he was so fond, he camped his enormous engine b etween her 
thighs, then withdrew it as he was about to discharge, and totally inundated her two buttocks. Curval had done the same to Zelmire, but 
the Bishop and Durcet contented themselves with what is known as the 
little goosing; later, their nap over, t hey passed into the auditorium, where the splendid Duclos, arrayed that day in everything that could 
most successfully cause an observer to forget her age, appeared even 
lovelier under the candlelight, and our libertines, grown very hot with 
much looking a t her, were loath to allow her to ascend to the platform 
without first having her exhibit her buttocks to the assembly.  
“A magnificent ass, upon my soul,” said Curval.  
“Oh, indeed, my friend,” said Durcet, “I warrant there are few better 
to be seen.”  
These  encomiums heard, our heroine lowered her skirts, took her seat, 
and resumed her story in such wise as the reader shall observe, if he be pleased to continue, which we advise that he do for the sake of his 
pleasure.  
A reflection and an event were responsib le, Messieurs, for the shift in 
battlefields; the digladiations I shall from now on relate were performed in 
other surroundings. The reflection was a most simple one: I remarked the 
lamentable condition of my purse, and straightway was set to thinking. I h ad 
been nine years at Madame Guérin’s, and although, during that time, I had 
disbursed very little, I now found myself without even a hundred  louis; that 
woman, extremely clever and never once deaf to the pleading of her own 
welfare, always found a way to pocket two -thirds of the house’s receipts and to 
impose additional deductions upon the remainder. These practices displeased me and, subject to repeated solicitations from another procuress, Madame Fournier, who wanted nothing more than to have me settle d own with her, 
and knowing that this Fournier received elderly debauchees of a higher tone 
and greater means than Guérin’s clientele, I decided to take my leave of the one 
and throw in my lot with the other. As for the event which lent support to my 
ideas, it was the loss of my sister: I had grown very attached to her, and I could no longer remain in a house where everything reminded me of her but whence 
she was absent . 
For nearly six months that dear sister had been receiving visits from a tall, 
dark, and s ilent man whose face I found exceedingly disagreeable. They would 
retire together, and I do not know how they passed their time, for never did 
my sister want to discuss what  they did, and never did they cavort in a place 
where I could view their commerce. In any event, she came into my room one 
fine morning, embraced me, and said that her fortune was made, she was to be 
the mistress of the tall man I disliked, and I learned only that the deciding 
factor in her conquest was the beauty of her buttocks. And wi th that she gave 
me her address, settled her accounts with Guérin, gave each of us a farewell 
kiss, and left. You may be sure that I did not fail to go to the indicated address, 
for I wished to see her. It was two days after her departure; I arrived, asked  for 
my sister, and my request was answered by shrugs and blank expressions. I 
saw perfectly clearly that my sister had been duped, for I could not imagine she 
would have deprived me of the pleasure of her company. When I related the thing to Guérin and co mplained of what had happened, a malign smile crept 
over her face. She refused to explain herself; hence I concluded she was 
embroiled in this mysterious adventure but did not want me to become 
involved in it. It all had a deep effect upon me and brought a  swift end to my 
unresolve; as, Messieurs, I shall have no occasion to speak of that beloved sister 
in future, I may say now that, notwithstanding the inquiries I had made and the lengths to which I went to find her, I was never able to discover what had 
become of her . 
“I dare say not,” Desgranges observed, “for, twenty -four hours after 
having left you, she was no longer alive. No, she did not deceive you; rather, she was herself deceived. But, as you surmised, Guérin knew 
what was afoot.”  “Merciful Heavens ! what are you telling me?” cried Duclos. “Alas! 
though deprived of the sight of her, I still imagined she was alive.”  
“Most erroneously,” Desgranges replied. “She told you the strict truth: 
it was indeed the beauty of her buttocks, the astonishing superiority of 
that memorable ass that procured her the adventure in which she 
flattered herself a fortune was to be earned, but wherein she gained 
death only.”  
“And the tall silent man?” Duclos asked.  
“He was no more than the courtier in the story, he was working for 
another.”  
“Yet, I tell you, he saw her assiduously for six months.”  
“In order to deceive her,” Desgranges answered; “but go on with your 
tale, these clarifications might prove tedious to their Lordships, and should they wish to hear more of the matte r, they may rest assured the 
anecdote will figure in my depositions.”  
“And spare us any emotional demonstrations, Duclos,” the Duc said 
dryly, upon noticing that it was all she could do to keep back a few 
involuntary tears, “we don’t much care for regrets and grievings, you 
know; as a matter of fact, all the works of Nature could be blown to hell 
and we’d not emit so much as a sigh. Leave tears to idiots and children, 
and may they never soil the cheeks of a clearheaded, clear -thinking 
woman, the sort we est eem.”  
With these words, our heroine took herself in hand and resumed her 
narrative at once.  
Owing to the two reasons I have just presented to your Lordships, I made 
up my mind to leave; Fournier offered me better accommodations, a far more interesting tabl e, much more remunerative although more arduous work, an 
equal share in the receipts, and no service charges. I went to her at once. At that time she occupied an entire house, and five pretty young girls composed 
her seraglio; I made the sixth. You will al low me to proceed again as earlier I 
did when describing Guérin’s establishment: I will not portray my companions -at-arms until one by one they step into the arena . 
On the morrow of my arrival, I was given a project, for Fournier ran a 
bustling house, people came and went all the time, each of us would often receive five or six clients in the space of a day; but I shall continue, as I have until now, to select none but those who, by dint of singularity or piquancy, are 
apt to arrest your attention.  
The firs t man I welcomed in my new habitation was a disbursing official, 
aged about fifty. He had me kneel by the bed with my chin resting on its edge; 
he established himself on the bed, kneeling also, and above me. He frigged his 
prick squarely into my mouth, com manding me to keep it wide open; I lost not 
a drop, and the bawdy fellow was prodigiously amused by the contortions and 
efforts to vomit this disgusting mouthwash caused in me . 
You will perhaps prefer me to group the four other adventures in this 
category I had at Madame Fournier’s, although you understand, Messieurs, 
that these encounters were separated in time. I am certain the telling will be 
far from displeasing to Monsieur Durcet, and perhaps very opportune, and for 
the rest of the evening he will most kindly permit me to entertain him with 
accounts of a passion for which he has enthusiasm, and which procured me the 
honor of making his acquaintance . 
“What’s this?” exclaimed Durcet; “you are going to have me play a role 
in your story?”  
“With your gracious leave, my Lord,” Duclos replied. “I shall simply 
advise Messieurs when I reach the point where you make your entrance.”  
“But my modesty …oh dear, oh dear! Before these little girls, do you 
mean you intend to disclose all my turpitudes to their innocent he aring?”  And everyone having chuckled over the financier’s whimsical fears, 
Duclos resumed her narrative.  
Another libertine, much older and in a different way disgusting, succeeded 
the one I mentioned a moment ago, and came to give me a second 
representatio n of the same mania; he had me stretch out naked upon a bed, 
stretched out himself, his head to my toe, popped his prick in my mouth and his tongue in my cunt, and having adopted this attitude, bade me make return for the voluptuous titillations he declare d his tongue was very certainly going to 
procure for me. I sucked as best I could; he had my pucelage, he licked, bubbled, splashed about and, without doubt, in all these maneuvers, labored infinitely 
more in his own behalf than in mine. Whatever may have been the truth, I 
felt nothing, and was exceedingly happy not to be horribly revolted by the 
whole affair; there ensued the roué’s discharge, an operation which, in accordance with Fournier’s earnest wishes, for she had given me foreknowledge 
of everything , an operation, I say, which I strove to make as lubricious as 
possible by sucking, by wringing the juice from his prick with my lips, by 
swishing it about in my mouth, and by running my hand over his buttocks 
and tickling his anus, which last detail, he i ndicated, pleased him very much, 
and which he performed on me in turn as best he could …. The business 
completed, our man beat his retreat, assuring Madame Fournier that never yet had he been outfitted with a girl who gave him more satisfaction than I . 
Shor tly after this latest of my exploits, an old witch of about seventy came to 
our house; I was curious to know what brought her to us, she seemed to have an expectant air, and, yes, I was told that she was awaiting a customer. 
Extremely eager to see to what purpose the old bag of bones was going to be 
put, I asked my companions whether there were not a room from which one 
might have a view of the bouts, as had been possible at Guérin’s. One of my 
friends replied that indeed such facilities were available and led me to a chamber equipped with not one, but two holes; we took our posts, and this is 
what we saw and heard, for the wall was no more than a thin partition, and 
sound traversed it so easily we lost not a word. The old dame arrived first. She 
looked at h erself in a mirror, primped, made adjustments, as if she fancied her 
charms were yet capable of conquering. A few minutes later, in walked this 
Chlo ë’s Daphnis; he was sixty at the most, a tax commissioner, a man who 
was very comfortably well off and who p referred spending his money upon 
worn -out sluts, old trash like this, rather than upon pretty girls; and why? 
’Twas  a singularity of taste you say that you understand, Messieurs, and 
indeed you explain the thing admirably. He advances, surveying his Dulcin ea; 
she makes him a bow of deepest respect . 
“No nonsense, you old bitch,” says the rake, “I don’t care for elegant 
manners. Get out of your clothes …. But wait just one moment. Have you any 
teeth?”  
“No, Sire, not a one is left in my head,” quoth the lady, o pening her foul old 
mouth. “See for yourself, may it please your Lordship.”  
Whereupon up steps his Lordship and, grasping her head, he deposits upon 
her lips one of the most passionate kisses I have seen in all my life; not merely 
did he kiss, but he sucke d, he devoured, most amorously he darted his tongue 
far, far into that putrid gullet, and the dear old grandmother, of whom not so 
much had been made in many a long year, replied with a tenderness which …I 
should have much difficulty describing to you.  
“Very well,” said the official, “that will do. Off with your clothes.”  
Meanwhile, he too undoes his breeches and brings out a little dark and 
wrinkled member about which there is nothing at all that promises an early 
erection. However, the old girl is naked, and with unimaginable effrontery 
comes up to offer her lover the sight of an ancient, yellow, and shriveled body, 
dry, shapeless, and unfleshed, the full description whereof, irrespective of your particular fancies in such matters, would so fill you with ho rror it were better 
for me to say no more; but far from being disgusted, repelled, upset by what 
greets his eye, our libertine is positively enchanted; ecstatic, he seizes her, draws 
her to where he is seated in a chair, manualizes her while waiting for he r to 
remove a last stitch of clothing, again darts his tongue into her mouth and, 
turning her around, for a moment pays his respects to the other side of the coin. 
I very distinctly saw him fondle her buttocks —but what am I saying? 
buttocks? rather, I saw him manipulate the two wrinkled rags which fell in 
waves and little ripples from her haunches and lay flapping on her thighs. Well, such as they were he drew them apart, voluptuously fastened his lips upon the infamous cloaca they enclosed, drove his tongu e repeatedly thereinto, 
and while he sweated happily over this ruin, she struggled to give some firmness to the moribund device she was rattling . 
“Let’s get to the heart of the matter,” said her beloved; “without my favorite 
stunts, all your attempts will be useless. You’ve been told?”  
“Yes, Monsieur, I have been told .” 
“And you know you’ve got to swallow ?” 
“Yes, my dearie, I’ll swallow, oh yes, my little cabbage, my pet, down it’ll 
go, I’ll devour every little drop my duckling makes.”  
And therewith the lib ertine deposits her on the bed, her head lying toward 
its foot, he straightway pops his limp engine between her gums, drives doughtily in up to the balls, wriggles about until, seizing his delight’s legs and perching them upon his shoulders, his snout is n icely lodged between the old 
creature’s buttocks. His tongue wanders deep into that exquisite hole; the honeybee going in quest of the rose’s nectar sucks not more voluptuously; the 
lady sucks too, our hero begins to stir. “Ah, fuck!” he cries after a  quar ter of an 
hour of this libidinous calisthenic, “suck me, suck me, suck and swallow it, you 
filthy buggeress , swallow, for it’s coming, by Jesus’ sweet face, it’s coming, don’t you feel it?” And flinging kisses here and there, scattering kisses upon 
everyth ing in sight, thighs, vagina, buttocks, anus, everything gets licked, 
everything is sucked, the old bitch gulps, and the poor old wreck, who withdraws as slack a device as the one he inserted, and who has apparently discharged unerected, goes tottering out  all ashamed of his transports, and as 
promptly as ever he can gains the door in order to avoid the sobering sight of the appalling object which has just seduced him in his weakness . 
“And the old bitch?” inquired the Duc.  
The old bitch coughed, spat, blew her nose, dressed with all possible 
dispatch, and left . 
A few days later, the same companion thanks to whom I had been able to 
enjoy witnessing this scene had her turn. She was a blond girl of about sixteen, with the world’s most interesting physiognomy; I  eagerly seized the 
opportunity to see her at work. The man with whom she was to hold 
conference was at least as old as the tax commissioner. He had her kneel 
between his legs, immobilized her head by catching hold of her ears, and snapped into her startle d mouth a prick which looked to me to be dirtier and 
more unappetizing than a rag left to soak in the gutter. Observing that 
frightful morsel approaching her clean healthy lips, my poor colleague was moved to back away, but it was not for nothing our gentleman held her like a 
spaniel by the ears . 
“What the devil’s this?” he muttered. “Are you going to be difficult?”  
And threatening to summon Fournier, who had doubtless recommended the 
most conciliatory attitude to her, he triumphed over her hesitations. She  opens 
her lips, retreats, opens them again and finally, gagging and spluttering, 
accepts into that sweetest of mouths that most infamous of relics; from this 
point onward, the villain’s speech was exceedingly rude . “Ah, little slut!” he shouted in a rage,  “you’ve got scruples, have you, about 
sucking the finest prick in France? You suppose, do you, that one’s got to wash 
one’s balls just for your sake? Well, fuck you, bitch: suck, do you hear? suck the 
sweetmeat.”  
Waxing very hot thanks to these sarcasms a nd the revulsion he noticed he 
was inspiring in my companion, for true it is, Messieurs, that the loathing you quicken in us becomes the gadfly that arouses your pleasure, stings your lust; waxing most ardent, I say, the libertine plunged into an ecstasy a nd left in the 
poor girl’s mouth the most definite evidence of his virility. Less complaisant than the old woman, she swallowed nothing, and far more revolted, a moment later she retched her stomach empty, and our libertine, readjusting himself 
without pay ing much attention to what she was about, laughed sneeringly 
between his teeth, amused by his libertinage’s cruel consequences . 
My turn came next. But more fortunate than my two predecessors, it was to 
Cupid himself I was turned over, and after having sati sfied him I was left 
with nothing but wonder to find tastes so peculiar in a young man so well 
framed to please. He arrives, he has me take off what I am wearing and lies 
down upon the bed, orders me to squat above his face and with my mouth 
proceed to try to wring a discharge from a very mediocre prick, for which 
however he has words of praise and whose fuck he entreats me to swallow as 
soon as I feel it flow . 
“But don’t waste the occasion to idleness,” the little libertine added, 
“meanwhile, I’d have that  cunt of yours flood urine into my mouth, I promise 
you I’ll swallow it as you shall my fuck, and I’d be delighted to sniff a few farts 
from that splendid ass.”  
I fell to the task and simultaneously executed my three chores with such skill 
and grace that t he little anchovy soon vomited all its fury into my mouth; I 
swallowed heartily, my Adonis likewise made short shrift of the piss that poured out of my crack and, while he drank, he inhaled the fragrance that a 
continual stream of farts bore to his nostril s. 
“Forsooth, Mademoiselle,” murmured Durcet, “you could surely have 
dispensed with disclosures that portray all my youthful childishness.”  
“Ha!” said the Duc with a merry laugh, “well indeed! You who 
scarcely dare look at a cunt today, do you mean to say you used to have ’em piss in the old days?”  
“’Tis true,” said Durcet, “I blush to admit it, for what could be more 
dreadful than to have such turpitudes upon one’s conscience? Oh, I presently feel the heavy weight of remorse, my friend …. O delicious 
asses! ” he exclaimed, in his enthusiasm kissing Sophie’s which he had 
drawn close for a minute’s fondling, “O divine asses! how I reproach myself for the incense I deprived you of! O delicious fundaments, I promise you an expiatory sacrifice, I swear upon your a ltars never again 
while I live to stray from the paths of rectitude.”  
And that splendid behind having heated him somewhat, the libertine 
placed the novice in what was doubtless an exceedingly indecent posture 
but one in which he was able, as has been seen above, to give his little 
anchovy to be sucked while sucking the tidiest, freshest, most voluptuous 
of asses. But Durcet, become now too blasé, too surfeited with that 
pleasure, only very rarely found it invigorating; one could suck all one 
wished, he coul d do the same till his lips cracked, ’twas  always the same: 
he would withdraw in the same collapsed state and, cursing and swearing 
at the girl, would regularly postpone until some happier moment the 
pleasures Nature denied him then.  
Not everyone was so unfortunate; the Duc, who had passed into his 
closet with Zélamir, Bum -Cleaver, and Thérèse, emitted shouts and 
bellows which attested to his happiness, and Colombe, hawking and spitting in great earnestness, left precious little doubt about the temple at 
which he had done his worshiping. As for the Bishop, reclining upon his 
couch in the most natural manner, Adelaide’s buttocks pinching his nose and his prick in her mouth, he was in seventh heaven, for he was having a wealth of farts out of the young woman; Curval, in an extremely 
upright state, plugged Hébé’s little mouth with his outsized stopper, and yielded up his fuck as he resorted to other stunts.  
Mealtime arrived. The Duc wished to advance the thesis that if 
happiness consisted in the entire satisfact ion of all the senses, it were 
difficult to be happier than were they.  
“The remark is not a libertine’s,” said Durcet. “How can you be happy 
if you are able constantly to satisfy yourself? It is not in desire’s consummation happiness consists, but in the d esire itself, in hurdling the 
obstacles placed before what one wishes. Well, what is the perspective 
here? One needs but wish and one has. I swear to you,” he continued, 
“that since my arrival here my fuck has not once flowed because of the objects I find about me in this castle. Every time, I have discharged over 
what is not here, what is absent from this place, and so it is,” the 
financier declared, “that, according to my belief, there is one essential 
thing lacking to our happiness. It is the pleasure of  comparison, a 
pleasure which can only be born of the sight of wretched persons, and 
here one sees none at all. It is from the sight of him who does not in the least enjoy what I enjoy, and who suffers, that comes the charm of being 
able to say to oneself:  ‘I am therefore happier than he.’ Wherever men 
may be found equal, and where these differences do not exist, happiness 
shall never exist either: it is the story of the man who only knows full 
well what health is worth after he has been ill.”  “In that case ,” said the Bishop, “you would maintain as a real source of 
pleasure the act of going and contemplating the tears of persons stricken 
by misery?”  
“Most assuredly,” Durcet replied. “In all the world there is perhaps no 
voluptuousness that more flatters the senses than the one you cite.”  
“What? You would not succor the lowly and wretched?” exclaimed the 
Bishop who took the most genuine delight in engaging Durcet to 
expatiate upon a question whose examination was so much to the taste of 
them all and upon which , they knew, the financier was able to deliver 
some very sound opinions.  
“What is it you term succor?” Durcet responded. “For the 
voluptuousness I sense and which is the result of this sweet comparison 
of their condition with mine, would cease to exist wer e I to succor them: 
by extricating them from a state of wretchedness, I should cause them to 
taste an instant’s happiness, thus destroying the distinction between 
them and myself, thus destroying all the pleas ure afforded by 
comparison.”  
“Well then, following that,” reasoned the Duc, “one should in one 
way or another, so as the better to establish that distinction indispensable to happiness, one should, I say, rather aggravate their 
plight.”  
“There is no doubting it,” said Durcet, “and that explains the infamies 
of which I have been accused all my life. Those who are in perfect ignorance of my motives,” the banker continued, “call me harsh, 
ferocious, barbaric, but, laughing at these divers denominations, I go 
merrily on; I cause, I dare say, what fools desc ribe as atrocities, but 
thereby I have created pleasure -giving distinctions and have made many 
a delectable comparison.”  “Come now,” said the Duc, “confess, my dear fellow: admit that upon 
more than a score of occasions you have engineered the ruin of some  
poor folk, simply by that means to serve the perverse tastes you have just 
acknowledged.”  
“More than a score?” said Durcet. “More than ten score, my friend, 
and, without the slightest exaggeration, I could enumerate above four hundred families reduced to beggardom, a state in which they’d not now be languishing had it not been for me.”  
“And,” said Curval, “I fancy you have profited from their ruin?”  
“Why yes, that has very frequently been the case, but I must also 
confess that often enough I have acted not  to gain, but purely to undo, at 
the behest of that certain wickedness which almost always awakens the organs of lubricity in me; my prick positively jumps when I do evil, in evil I discover precisely what is needed to stimulate in me all of pleasure’s 
sensations, and I perform evil for that reason, for it alone, without any 
ulterior motive.”  
“Upon my soul,” declared the Président, “I own I fancy nothing better 
than that taste. When I was in Parliament I must have voted at least a 
hundred times to have some  poor devil hanged; they were all innocent, 
you know, and I would never indulge in that little injustice without 
experiencing, deep within me, a most voluptuous titillation: no more was 
needed to inflame my balls, nothing used to heat them more certainly. 
You can imagine what I felt when I did worse.”  
“It is certain,” said the Duc, whose brain was beginning to warm as he 
fingered Zéphyr, “that crime has sufficient charm of itself to ignite all 
the senses, without one having to resort to any other expedient;  no one 
understands better than I that enormities and malpractices, even those at 
the most extreme remove from libertine misbehavior, are quite as capable of inciting an erection as those which lie directly within the 
sphere of libertinage. The man who is addressing you at this very instant 
has owed spasms to stealing, murdering, committing arson, and he is perfectly sure that it is not the object of libertine intentions which fires us, but the idea of evil, and that consequently it is thanks only to evil a nd 
only in the name of evil one stiffens, not thanks to the object, and were this object to be divested of the power to cause us to do evil, our prick would droop, ’twould  interest us no more.”  
“What could be more certain than that?” the Bishop demanded. “ And 
thence is born another certitude: the greatest pleasure is derived from the most infamous source. The doctrine which must perpetually govern our 
conduct is this: the more pleasure you seek in the depths of crime, the 
more frightful the crime must be; a s for myself, Messieurs,” added the 
Bishop, “if I may be permitted to speak personally, I affirm that I have 
reached the point of no longer being susceptible of this sensation you 
have been discussing, of no longer experiencing it, I say, as a result of lesser or minor crimes, and if the one I perpetrate does not combine as 
much of the atrocious, of the base, of the vicious, of the deceitful, of the 
treacherous as may be possibly imagined, the sensation is not merely 
faint, there is no sensation at all.”  
“Very well,” said Durcet, “is it possible to commit crimes such as these 
our minds yearn after, crimes like those you mention? For my part, I 
must declare that my imagination has always outdistanced my faculties; I 
lack the means to do what I would do, I hav e conceived of a thousand 
times more and better than I have done, and I have ever had complaint 
against Nature who, while giving me the desire to outrage her, has 
always deprived me of the means.”  “There are,” said Curval, “but two or three crimes to perfo rm in this 
world, and they, once done, there’s no more to be said; all the rest is 
inferior, you cease any longer to feel. Ah, how many times, by God, have 
I not longed to be able to assail the sun, snatch it out of the universe, make a general darkness, o r use that star to burn the world! oh, that 
would be a crime, oh yes, and not a little misdemeanor such as are all the ones we perform who are limited in a whole year’s time to metamorphosing a dozen creatures into lumps of clay.”  
Whereupon, their minds ha ving waxed gay and hot, as two or three 
young girls had already had cause to remark, and their pricks beginning to rise, they left the table and went in search of pretty mouths, 
thereinto to pour the floods of that liquor whose too insistent 
throbbings promoted the utterance of so many horrors. That evening they confined themselves to mouth pleasures, but invented a hundred 
manners of varying them, and when they had run, all four of them, 
each a magnificent race, in a few hours of repose they sought to find  
the strength necessary to starting out afresh.    
THE NINTH DAY  
That morning Duclos expressed her opinion, saying she held it prudent 
either to offer the little girls new patients to replace the fuckers then being employed in the masturbation exercises, or to terminate their 
lessons, for she believed their education sufficiently advanced. Duclos 
very astutely pointed out that by continued use of the young men known 
by their title of fucker, there might result that species of intrigue 
Messieurs wished espec ially to prevent; moreover, she added, for such 
exercises these young men were worth nothing at all; since they were 
prone to discharge immediately they were touched, their skittishness or 
incontinence ought certainly be better exploited, Messieurs’ asses had 
only to lose if the program remained unchanged. It was therefore 
decided that the lessons would cease; they had generally succeeded, there 
were already amongst the little girls a few who frigged masterfully: 
Augustine, Sophie, and Colombe could easily have been matched, what for skill and nimbleness of wrist, against the capital’s most famous 
friggers. Of them all, Zelmire was least adept: not that she lacked agility 
or that considerable science was not conspicious in all her motions, no, 
but it was her  tender and melancholic character which stood in her way, 
she seemed unable to forget her sorrows, she was sad and pensive at all 
times. At that morning’s breakfast inspection tour, her duenna affirmed 
she had the previous evening caught the child in a pra yerful attitude, 
flagrantly on her knees before retiring; Zelmire was summoned, questioned, she was asked the subject of her prayers; she at first refused 
to answer, then, threats having been employed, she fell to weeping and 
admitted she had besought God to deliver her from the perils wherewith she was beset, and had above all prayed that help would come before her 
virginity were lost. The Duc thereupon declared she deserved to die, and 
made her read the articles which dealt specifically with this subject.  
“Very well,” she sighed, “kill me, at least the God I invoke shall have 
pity upon me, kill me before you dishonor me, and that soul I have 
devoted to Him will at least fly in purity to His breast. I shall be 
delivered of the torment of seeing and hearing so many horrors every day.”  
A reply wherein reigned such a quantity of virtue, of candid 
innocence, and of gracious amenity caused our libertines prodigiously to stiffen. There were voices that called out for her instantaneous 
depucelation, but the Duc, re minding his cohorts of the inviolable 
contract they had subscribed to, was content to propose —and his 
suggestion was unanimously approved —that she be condemned to be 
punished very violently the following Saturday and that, in the 
meantime, she kneel and fo r fifteen minutes take into her mouth and 
suck each friend’s prick, and that she be given by way of warning the 
assurance that, were she to repeat her error, it would decidedly cost her 
her life, for she would be judged and punished to the fullest extent of the 
law. The poor little thing crawled up to accomplish the first part of her 
penance, but the Duc, whom the ceremony had aroused, and who after 
having pronounced sentence had prodigiously fondled her ass, like the villain he was, shot all his boiling se ed into that pretty little mouth, in so 
doing threatening to strangle her if she spat out a drop, and the poor little wretch swallowed it all, not without furious repugnances. The three 
others were similarly sucked one after the other, but yielded nothing,  
and after the usual visit to the boys’ quarters and the excursion to the 
chapel, which that morning produced little because almost everyone had been refused permission to join the party, the meal was served, and then 
Messieurs entered the salon for coffee . 
It was served by Fanny, Sophie, Hyacinthe, and Zélamir; Curval 
fancied he might thigh -fuck Hyacinthe, and obliged Sophie to post 
herself in such a way as to be able to suck that length of his prick which 
protruded beyond Hyacinthe’s tightly squeezed legs . The scene was 
pleasant and inspiriting, he frigged the little chap he held hugged to his 
belly, and Hyacinthe discharged upon Sophie’s face; the Duc, who 
owing to the dimensions of his prick was the only other one who could 
imitate this performance, like wise arranged himself with Zélamir and 
Fanny, but the lad had not yet reached the discharging age, and thus the 
nobleman had to do without the very agreeable episode Curval 
considered so enjoyable. After they had finished, Durcet and the Bishop took charge  of the four children and had themselves sucked, but no one 
discharged, and after a brief nap, the company moved into the auditorium where, everyone having assumed his place, Duclos went on with her disclosures.  
Before any other audience, said that amiable  girl, I might shrink at 
broaching the subject of the narratives wherewith this entire week we shall be occupied, but however crapulous that subject, I am too well acquainted with 
your tastes, Messieurs, to be in any wise apprehensive. No, I believe you’ll  not 
be displeased; quite the contrary, I am convinced you will find my anecdotes 
agreeable. I ought however to advise you that you are about to hear of 
abominable, filthy goings on; but whose ears could be better made to appreciate 
them? your hearts love and desire them, hence I enter into the matter without 
further delay or ambages . 
At Madame Fournier’s we had a trusty old client who was known as the 
Chevalier, I don’t know why, or whence the title came; his custom was to pay us a visit every evening, and  the little rite that we regularly performed with 
him was equally simple and bizarre: he would unbutton his breeches, and we 
were required to form a queue and one by one drop a turd into them. Once we 
had all done our duty, he would button up again and go off in great haste, taking that freight with him. While he was being supplied he would frig 
himself for an instant or two, but he was never seen to discharge, and no one 
knew where he went or what he did with his breechload of shit . 
“Oh, by Jesus!” muttere d Curval, who never heard anything he had 
not a desire to do on the spot, “I’ll have someone shit in my breeches, and I’ll keep the treasure the whole evening.”  
And ordering Louison to come render him that service, the old 
libertine provided the assembly w ith a full -blown dramatization of the 
whimsy whereof account had just been delivered.  
“Well, go on,” he said phlegmatically, nodding to Duclos and settling 
down on his couch again, “there’s nothing to it, and I expect it will only be the lovely Aline, my c harming companion for the afternoon, who’ll 
find something inconvenient about it. As for myself, a pound of shit in 
the vicinity suits me perfectly.”  
And Duclos resumed her story.  
Forewarned , said she, of all that was destined to take place at the home of 
the libertine to whom I was being sent, I dressed myself as a boy, and as I was 
only twenty, with pretty hair and a pretty face, that costume very well became me. Before leaving, I took care to do in my breeches what Monsieur le 
Président has just had done  for him in his. My man was awaiting me in bed, 
I approach him, he kisses me very lewdly two or three times, he tells me I’m the 
prettiest little boy he’s ever set eyes upon, and while praising me he undertakes 
to unbutton my breeches. I put up a faint res istance with the single purpose of inflaming his desires all the more, he entreats me, urges me, he has his way, 
but how am I to describe to you the ecstasy that possesses him when he perceives 
the package I have brought along, and the colorful mess it has  made of my two 
buttocks . 
“Why, what’s this?” cries he. “You’ve shit in your breeches, have you? But, 
my little rascal, ’tis very nasty, you know. How could you have done such a 
thing?”  
And quick as a shot, holding me with my back turned to him and my 
breeches pulled down, he sets to frigging and rattling himself, presses against 
me, and spurts his fuck upon my beshitted behind, the while driving his tongue 
into my mouth . 
“Do you mean to say,” exclaimed the Duc, “he refrained from 
touching anything? Didn’t he handle it?”  
“No, your Lordship,” Duclos made him answer, “I recount all that 
transpired, I conceal no detail; but have a little patience, Sire, and we will gradually reach more entertaining circumstances.”  
“Come,” said one of my companions, “let’s go wa tch a truly humorous fellow. 
He doesn’t need a girl, he amuses himself all alone.”  
We repaired to the hole, having been informed that in the adjoining room, 
the one selected for his activities, there was a pierced chair and beneath it a 
chamber pot we had been busy filling for four days and in which there must 
have been at least a dozen large turds. Our man arrives. He was an elderly tax-farmer of about seventy years. He shuts the door, goes straight to the pot he 
knows to be brimming with the goodies he ha s ordered for his sport. He takes 
up the vessel and, seating himself in an armchair, passes a full hour gazing lovingly at all the treasure whereof he has been made the proprietor; he sniffs, 
inhales, he touches, he handles, seems to lift one turd out afte r another in order to contemplate them the better. Finally become ecstatic, from his fly he pulls a 
nasty old black rag which he shakes and beats with all his might; one hand 
frigs, the other burrows into the pot and scoops out handfuls of divine unction. 
He anoints his tool, but it remains as limp as before. There are moments, after all, when Nature is so stubborn that even the excesses we most delight in fail to 
awake a response. He did all in his power, and unavailingly, for nothing 
resulted or rose glor iously up, but by dint of abuse meted out by the same hand 
that had just been steeped in the ordure, the ejaculation occurred, he trembled, 
thrilled, fell backward, smelled, breathed deeply, rubbed his prick, and 
discharged upon the heap of shit which had just so inspired him . 
Another gentleman dined with me one evening. We were alone together, 
and twelve large plates heaped with the same meats were brought in and combined with the remnants of an earlier course. He sniffed these new dishes, sampled their ar omas, and after he had finished eating, bade me frig him upon 
the one that had struck him as the most handsome . 
A young crown attorney used to pay according to the number of enemas one 
was willing to receive at his hands; when I crossed swords with him, I agreed 
to accept seven, he administered them all himself; thus, seven times over had I 
to mount a little stepladder, while he, stationed underneath me, frigged 
himself  until I spewed out over his prick the entire charge with which he had 
lubricated my bowe ls. 
As may be readily imagined, the entire evening was devoted to 
unclean activities of roughly the same species that had been treated in 
story, and that Messieurs turned to this kind of sport will be all the 
more easily understood in the light of their ge neral enthusiasm for this 
passion; it was of course Curval who carried matters the furthest, but 
his three colleagues were scarcely less infatuated with the novelties laid 
out before them. The little girls’ eight steaming turds were arranged amidst the sup per’s dishes, and at the orgies the competition was 
doubtless even keener for those of the little boys; and thus ended the 
ninth day whose term they saw arrive with the greatest pleasure, for 
they had high expectations for the morrow, which was destined to provide them with more amply detailed anecdotes treating a subject 
they adored.    
THE TENTH DAY  
(Remember to be more guarded in the beginning and more 
gradually to disclose what is to be clarified here.)  
The farther we advance, the more thoroughly we may inform the reader 
about certain facts we were obliged to no more than hint at in the earlier part of our story. We are able, for example, presently to advise him of the purpose of the morning visits and searches conducted in the 
children’s quarters, the c ause of their punishment when in the course of 
these inspections delinquents were found, and just what were the 
delights Messieurs tasted in the chapel: the subjects were expressly 
forbidden to go to the toilet or in any other place to move their bowels 
without individual and particular permission, this in order that there be held in reserve matters which could, as the occasion arose, be doled out 
to those who desired them. The visit served to determine whether 
anyone had neglected to comply with this order ; the officer of the month 
carefully inspected all the chamber pots and other receptacles, and if he 
found any that were not empty, the subject concerned was immediately 
inscribed in the punishment register. However, provision had been made 
for those who c ould hold back no longer: they were, a little before the 
midday meal, to betake themselves to the chapel Messieurs had converted into a privy so designed that our libertines were able to enjoy the pleasure which the satisfaction of these pressing needs had  the power 
to procure them, and the others, who had been allowed, or who had 
been able, to keep their loads, had the opportunity to be rid of them at 
some time or another during the day and in that manner which most 
pleased the friends, and above all in th at particular manner upon which full details will subsequently be provided, for these details will compass 
all the manners of indulging in this voluptuous delight.  
And there was yet another cause which led to the distribution of 
punishment, and it was the following one: what is called in France the bidet ceremony did not exactly please our friends; Curval, for example, 
could not bear to have the subjects with whom he came to grips wash 
themselves; Durcet’s attitude was identical, and so it was that the one and the other would notify their duennas of the subjects with whom they 
planned to amuse themselves the next day, and these subjects were 
forbidden to wipe, rub, or wash themselves in any way and under any circumstances, and the two other friends, who did not share this 
abhorrence of tidiness and for whom dirt was not by any means essential, 
nevertheless concurred with Curval and Durcet, aided in maintaining an agreeable state of affairs, and if after having been told to be impure a 
subject took it into his  head to be clean, he was straightway added to the 
fatal list.  
That is what happened that morning to Colombe and Hébé; they had 
shitted during the previous night’s orgies and, knowing that they were 
listed to serve coffee on the following day, Curval, who planned to 
amuse himself with both of them and who had even advised them that 
they would be expected to fart, had recommended that things be left just 
as they were. The children did nothing to themselves before going to bed. Inspection arrived, and Durcet,  aware of the instructions Curval 
had given, was perfectly amazed to find them as neat as a pin; forgetfulness was the excuse they offered, but their names went down in 
the register nevertheless.  
No chapel permissions were granted that morning. (We should like 
the reader to make a particular effort to remember what we mean by such an expression; this will dispense us from having to repeat our 
explanations.) Calculations of what would be required during the 
storytelling period forbade any prodigality until t hat time.  
Upon this day the boys’ masturbation lessons were suspended, for they 
had entirely served their purpose, and every one of the little lads frigged 
as expertly as the cleverest whore in Paris. Zéphyr and Adonis led the 
pack in skill, speed, and def tness, and there are few pricks which would 
not ejaculate nigh to bleeding were they to be ministered by little hands 
as nimble and delicious as theirs.  
Nothing worth citing occurred until coffee; it was served by Giton, 
Adonis, Colombe, and Hébé; these four children had, by way of 
preparation, been stuffed with every decoction which is best able to 
provoke winds, and Curval, who had proposed to be treated to farts, received a generous quantity of them. The Duc had himself sucked, or 
rather licked, by Giton , whose little mouth simply could not manage to 
engulf the enormous machine tendered him. Durcet performed some 
choice little horrors with Hébé, the Bishop thigh -fucked Colombe. Six 
o’clock sounded, they moved into the auditorium where, everyone 
having tak en his post, Duclos began to recount what you shall read:  
A new companion had very recently come to Madame Fournier’s; owing to 
the role she is going to play in the account of the passion which follows, I 
believe I should give you at least a rough sketch o f her. She was a young 
seamstress, debauched by the seducer I earlier mentioned having observed at 
Guérin’s, and she also worked for Fournier. She was fourteen, had chestnut -
brown hair, sparkling brown eyes, the most voluptuous little face in all the 
world , skin lily white and satin smooth, very trimly made she was, although 
rather inclining to fleshiness, from which slight disadvantage there resulted the sweetest, cutest, the plumpest ass, the fairest, oh ’twas  possibly the finest ass in Paris. I was stati oned at the hole in the partition and soon beheld the man 
who was to deflower her, for she was yet a maid on either side, nothing could 
be plainer. Such a tidbit could only have been fed to someone very much 
beloved of the house: he was the venerable Abbé de Fierville, equally renowned for his wealth and his debauchery, and he had the gout to his very fingertips. 
He arrives swathed to the eyes in a mantle, installs himself in the chamber, 
examines all the equipment he is about to use, prepares everything, a nd then 
the little girl arrives; her name is Eugénie. Somewhat frightened by her first 
lover’s grotesque face, she lowers her gaze and blushes . 
“Come hither, come hither,” says the libertine, “and show me your behind.”  
“Oh, Monsieur …” murmurs the shy littl e thing . 
“Come, come,” fumes the old roué, “nothing worse than these novices; she 
just can’t imagine anyone should wish to look at an ass. Well, by the Saviour, 
get your damned skirts up.”  
And, stepping closer for fear of displeasing Fournier, whom she has  
promised to be very obedient, she finally pulls her skirt halfway up from behind . 
“Higher, do you hear, higher,” cries the pleasant old rascal. “Do you suppose 
I’m going to bother to do it myself?”  
And in due time the beautiful ass is completely exposed. The man of God 
scrutinizes it, has her stand straight, has her bend forward, has her squeeze her legs tight together, has her separate them and, leaning her over the bed, spends a moment crudely, nay, uncouthly rubbing all his frontward privities, which 
he has brought to light and with which he now prods and pushes Eug énie’s 
matchless bum, as if to electrify himself, as if to attract to himself some of that 
lovely child’s essential heat. From this he passes to kisses, he falls to his knees in 
order to be mo re at his ease, and with both hands holding those superb buttocks as far apart as possible, both his tongue and lips rummage about in search of 
treasure . 
“They’re right,” says he, “you do have a passably fine ass. Have you been 
shitting recently?”  
“Just a little while ago, Father,” the little one answers. “Madame had me do 
that before coming up.”  
“Why, that’s nice …and so there’s nothing left in your bowels,” says the 
lecher. “Well, we’re going to see.”  
And catching up the syringe, he fills it with milk, returns to behind his 
object, brandishes the nozzle, plunges it into the vent, and shoots out the fluid. Having been told what to expect, Eugénie submits to everything; no sooner is 
the remedy in her entrails than he lies down on the bed and orders Eugénie to  
come at once and straddle him. “Now,” says he, “if you’ve got anything to do, 
have the kindness to do it in my mouth.” The timid creature has taken her 
place as she has been told to do, she pushes, the libertine frigs himself, his 
mouth, sealed hermetical ly to her asshole, catches every drop of the precious 
liquid that leaps out of it. He swallows  it all, giving evidence of the greatest 
scrupulousness in this matter, and just when he swills down the final 
mouthful, his fuck escapes and he is hurled into a delirium. But what is this 
strange mood, this cloud of loathing which, as in the case of almost every other 
libertine, comes to darken a mind whence the entire illusion has fled? Brutally 
casting the little girl far from him once he has done, the saintly m an readjusts 
his cleric’s garb, says that he has been cheated, deceived, for this child, he 
swears, had not priorly shitted, no, they’d lied, she’d come to him full of shit, 
and he’d swallowed half her turd, fie upon them. It is to be noted that 
Monsieur l’Abbé wanted milk only, not shit. He grumbles, he curses, he storms, 
says he won’t pay, won’t ever come back, says he’ll be damned if he’ll stir 
himself for little snotfaces like this one, and goes off shouting a thousand other invectives I’ll surely have occasion to report to you in connection with another 
passion in which they play a major role rather than, as in this instance, a very 
subordinate one . 
“Well, by God,” Curval remarked, “there you have a very fastidious 
man who’ll get upset over swallowing a  little shit when there are I don’t 
know how many who feast upon it.”  
“Patience, Sire, patience,” said Duclos, “allow my recitals to succeed 
each other in the order you yourselves dictated and you shall see the superior libertines you allude to achieve wonders on the stage.”  
My turn came two days later. Instructions had been given me, and I stayed 
away from the water closet for thirty -six hours. My hero was an elderly 
ecclesiastic who served as chaplain to the King; like the aforementioned athlete 
he too wa s crippled with gout: he was only to be approached if one were naked, 
but one’s front and breast had to be very thoroughly covered; much emphasis 
had been placed upon this latter article, and I had been warned that were he to 
catch the least glimpse of tho se parts, it would prove a heavy misfortune, I’d 
never be able to get him to discharge. I approach, he studies my behind with 
extreme attentiveness, asks my age, asks whether it is true I have a great urge 
to shit, inquires as to the kind of shit I ordinar ily produce, is it soft ? is it hard? 
and a thousand other questions the asking of which, it seems to me, has the effect of animating him, for, as he chatters away his prick gradually lifts its 
head and leans toward me. That prick, approximately four inches  in length by 
two or three around, had, despite its brilliant sheen, something of so humble 
and so pitiful an air that one all but needed spectacles to be certain of its 
existence. Solicited by my man thus to do, I laid firm hands on it, and noticing 
that my motions were rather well irritating his desires, he made ready to 
consummate the sacrifice . “But is it a truly authentic desire, my child,” says he, “this desire to shit you 
mention? For I don’t care to be deceived; come, let’s see whether you do indeed  
have shit in your ass.”  
And so saying, he buries his right hand’s longest finger in my fundament, 
while with his left hand he sustains the erection I have excited in his desire. 
That plummeting finger had no need to search far, the chaplain was swiftly 
persuaded I had, quite as I said, the sincerest wish to shit, and when his gropings contacted the object of our mutual concern, he flew into a perfect 
ecstasy : 
“Ah, by God’s belly,” he cries, “she tells the truth, the chicken is about to lay, 
and I feel the egg.”  
Enchanted, the bawdy old priest passes a moment kissing my bum, and 
observing the haste I am in and that I shall soon be unable to restrain the 
insurgent turd, he has me climb aboard an apparatus quite similar to the one 
your Lordships have here in t he chapel; once seated, my behind perfectly 
exposed to his view, I was able to lodge my complaint in a receptacle located 
two or three inches from his nose. This apparatus had been built expressly for 
the chaplain, and he employed it frequently, for scarcely a day went by without 
him coming to Fournier’s to assist in delivering either some girl attached to the 
house or some other from outside it. An armchair drawn close allowed him to 
observe the process from a point of vantage situated just below the ring 
supporting my ass . 
When we had taken our positions upon our respective thrones, he ordered 
me to commence the operation. For prelude, I release a series of farts; he inhales them. The turd hoves into sight at last; he begins to pant.  
“Shit, my little one, shit away, my angel,” he cries, all afire. “Show me the 
turd coming forth out of your lovely ass.”  And he aids the delivery, pressing his fingers about my anus, he facilitates 
the eruption; he frigs himself, he observes, he is drunk with lust, pleasure’s 
excess finally transports him completely, he loses his head; his cries, his sighs, his 
fingerings, everything convinces me he is nearing the final stage and, turning 
my head toward him, I find I have judged correctly, for there is his miniature 
engine spatt ering a few drops of sperm into the same pot I have just filled. The 
chaplain left in a good humor, and even assured me he expected he would 
honor me with another visit, which promise I knew very well to be false, for it 
was common knowledge he never saw t he same girl twice . 
“Well, I appreciate his feelings in the matter,” declared the Président, 
who was kissing Aline’s ass. “One must be in our deplorable situation, one must be reduced to rack and ruin in order to be able to bear having 
the same ass shit tw ice.” 
“Monsieur le Président,” spoke up the Bishop, “there is a certain 
halting tone in your voice which leads me to suspect your prick is in the air.” 
“Tush,” Curval replied, “I’m merely kissing the buttocks of 
Mademoiselle your daughter, who hasn’t even the courtesy to let fly one 
wretched little fart.”  
“I am then enjoying better luck than you,” the Bishop announced, “for 
Madame your wife, lo and behold! has just presented me with the most 
beautiful and the bulkiest turd ….” 
“Silence, gentlemen, silence, I  say!” came from the Duc, whose voice 
seemed muffled as if by something covering his head. “Silence, by Jesus! 
we are here to listen, not to act.”  
“Which is therefore to say, I take it, that you are doing nothing,” 
inquired the Bishop, “and is it in order to listen that you are wallowing 
under three or four assholes?”  “Well, you know, he’s right. Go on, Duclos, it were wiser that we hear 
about foolish acts than commit them. We must save our strength.”  
And Duclos was on the point of resuming when they all he ard the 
usual shouts and customary blasphemies that accompanied the Duc’s 
discharges; surrounded by his quatrain, being frigged by Augustine who, 
said he, did it deliciously, his fuck was escaping him as with Sophie, 
Zéphyr, and Giton he performed countles s little wantonries of a kind 
very analogous to those Duclos had been describing.  
“Great God!” Curval exclaimed, “I can’t tolerate these bad examples; 
there’s nothing that makes me discharge like a discharge, and would you believe it? here’s that little wh ore,” he added, referring to Aline, “who 
only a moment ago could accomplish nothing at all and who is presently doing everything one could ask for …but no matter, I’ll keep my grip. 
Ah, you bitch, shit away, shit your head off, it will get you nowhere, I 
don’t intend to give up my seed.”  
“I see very well, Messieurs,” said Duclos, “that after having perverted 
you it is my responsibility to restore you to reason, and to do so I am going to resume my story without waiting for your command.”  
“No, don’t you do it ,” cried the Bishop, “I am not as continent as 
Monsieur le Président, not I, my fuck’s itching me, and it’s got to be shed.”  
Wherewith, he was seen very publicly to perform things the structure 
of this very complex fiction prevents us from revealing at this stage, but things whose delightful influence very rapidly brought leaping forth the 
fuck whose mounting pressure had discomfited the Bishop’s thrice -
blessed balls. As for Durcet, absorbed in Thérèse’s ass, nothing was 
heard from him, and in all likelihoo d Nature refused him what she 
lavishly granted the others, for he was not as a rule mute when accorded her favors. Seeing that now at last calm had been restored, Duclos went 
on with her lubricious exploits.  
A month later, I came to grips with a man whom o ne had almost to violate 
in order satisfactorily to carry out an operation somewhat akin to the one I related several minutes ago. I shit upon a dish, I bring it to him and thrust it 
under his nose while he sits in an armchair quietly reading a book, seemi ngly 
unaware of my presence. He looks up, falls to swearing, asks how the devil can 
the girl have the insolence to do such a thing in his presence, but all the same 
it’s a queer turd she’s got there, he contemplates it, handles it; I ask forgiveness 
for the liberty I have taken, he continues to mumble incoherencies at me, and 
then discharges with his eyes fixed on the morsel of shit; and in so doing he says 
he’ll find me again someday, that sooner or later he’ll see to it that I get what I 
deserve . 
A fourth gentleman employed none but women of seventy or more in 
practices which were quite similar; I watched him enact his rite with an old creature who could not have been less than eighty. He was reclining upon a sofa, the matron was straddling him; she deposi ted her strange old package on 
his belly while frigging a wrinkled, shriveled prick which scarcely discharged 
at all . 
At Fournier’s establishment we had another curious article of furniture: a 
kind of toilet chair, provided with the usual hole and set agai nst the wall; 
things were so arranged that a man could lie in such a way that while his body extended into the neighboring room, his shoulders passed through an opening 
and his head occupied the place usually reserved for the chamber pot. I had been 
appoin ted to the task, and kneeling between his legs, I sucked his prick as best I 
could throughout the operation. Well, this extraordinary ceremony consisted in 
having a workman, who was paid to act a part whose full consequences he 
neither knew nor divined; in having, I say, a man of the people enter the room containing the chair, climb upon it, and do his business squarely upon the face 
of the patient over whom I was toiling; but the shit bearer had absolutely to be 
a poor drudge fetched in from the humblest m ilieu, he had as well to be old and 
ugly, he was inspected before being put to work, and were he to lack any of 
these qualities, our libertine would have nothing to do with him. During all 
this, I saw nothing but heard rather a lot: the instant of collisio n was also that 
of my man’s discharge, his fuck sprang down my throat the same moment the 
turd splashed upon his face, and when he emerged from beneath the chair and 
got to his feet, I saw by the state he was in that he had been handsomely 
served. By chanc e, after the exercise was over, I happened to meet the fellow 
who had performed so brilliantly; he was from the Auvergne, a good honest 
chap who earned his livelihood working with stonemasons; he seemed 
delighted to earn a crown by doing naught but ridding  himself of what he 
would have had one way or another to expel from his bowels, and this little 
chore struck him as infinitely less arduous than carrying his  hod. He was, what 
for his looks, quite dreadful to behold and must have been over forty . 
“Faith,” muttered Durcet, “I think that should do it.”  
And passing into his closet with the eldest of the fuckers, with 
Thérèse and Desgranges, he was heard braying and whinnying some 
minutes later; he returned but was disinclined to inform the company of 
the preci se nature of the excesses whereunto he had surrendered himself.  
Supper was announced; it proved at least as libertine as ever, and after 
the meal, the four friends having been moved to spend the evening away from one another instead of frolicking together as they customarily did, 
the Duc went off to the boudoir at the end of the corridor, taking with 
him Hercule, Martaine, his daughter Julie, Zelmire, Hébé, Zélamir, 
Cupidon, and Marie.  Curval commandeered the auditorium, providing himself with what 
companionship Constance could afford him, for she fell to trembling 
every time she found herself with him, and he did exceedingly little to 
allay her fears; he also took Fanchon, Desgranges, Bum -Cleaver, 
Augustine, Fanny, Narcisse, and Zéphyr.  
The Bishop went into the drawing room with Duclos who, that 
evening, revenged herself upon the fickle Duc, who had led Martaine away with him; Aline, Invictus, Thérèse, Sophie, the charming little 
Colombe, Céladon, and Adonis completed the prelate’s entourage.  
Durcet remained  in the dining room. It was cleared, rugs and 
cushions were brought in and strewn all about. He encloseted himself, I 
say, with Adelaide, his beloved wife, with Antinoüs, Louison, 
Champville, Michette, Rosette, Hyacinthe, and Giton.  
More the redoubling of lecherous appetites than any other reason had 
doubtless dictated this arrangement, for brains were heated to such a point that evening that it was unanimously agreed no one would go to bed; it was perfectly incredible what was achieved in each room by way 
of infamies and impurities.  
Toward dawn, their Lordships decided to return to table, although 
they had taken abundant drink throughout the night; everyone trooped into the dining room, there was an indistinct, promiscuous pell -mell, 
the cooks were awakened and soon sent in scrambled eggs, toast, onion 
soup, and omelettes. Drinking was resumed, the company grew very merry, all save Constance who was plunged in inconsolable sadness. 
Curval’s hatred was growing just as certainly as was her poor belly; she 
had that night during the orgies experienced the effects of his hostility, 
she had suffered everything but blows, for Messieurs had agreed to 
leave the pear to ripen; she had, I say, blows excepted, undergone every imaginable mistreatment; she thought to compl ain to Durcet and to 
her husband, the Duc: they both bade her go to the devil and remarked 
that she must surely have been guilty of some fault which was hidden 
from their eyes, yes, surely, else how could she thus ever have displeased that most virtuous and most gentle of mortals; they wagged 
their heads and walked away. And then they all went to bed.    
THE ELEVENTH DAY  
They did not rise till late that day, and dispensing with all the usual 
ceremonies, went directly to table once they had got up from their  beds. 
Coffee, served by Giton, Hyacinthe, Augustine, and Fanny, was largely 
uneventful, although Durcet could not do without some farts from 
Augustine, and the Duc thrust his brave instrument between Fanny’s 
lips. Now, as from the desire to what the desir e causes ’tis ever but a 
single step with personages such as our heroes, they went unswervingly toward satisfying themselves; happily, Augustine was prepared, she blew a steady breeze into the little financier’s mouth, and he came nigh to 
stiffening; as for Curval and the Bishop, they confined themselves to 
fondling the two little boys’ behinds, and then our champions moved to 
the auditorium.  
One day little Eugénie, who was becoming more familiar with the rest of us 
and whom six months in the whorehouse had  only rendered all the prettier, 
Eugénie, I say, one day accosted me and, lifting her skirts, bade me look at her 
ass. “Do you see, Duclos, how Fournier wants me to keep my behind today?”  
An inch -thick patch of shit covered her sweet little asshole . 
“And w hy does she want you to wear that?” I asked her . 
“It’s for the sake of an old gentleman who is coming this afternoon,” she 
explained, “and he expects a beshitted ass.”  
“Well, well,” said I, “he’ll be very pleased with you. I’m sure, for yours 
couldn’t poss ibly be more thickly encrusted.”  
And she told me that Fournier’s was the hand that had  smeared her thus. 
Curious to witness the impending scene, I flew to the spy hole as soon as dear little Eugénie was summoned. The principal actor was a monk, but one of those monks we call  gros bonnets, a Cistercian, tall, heavy, vigorous, and 
nearing sixty. He caresses the child, kisses her upon the mouth, and demanding 
to know whether she is neat and clean, he hoists her petticoats personally to 
verify a constant state of cleanliness whereof Eugénie gives him full assurance, 
although knowing nothing could be further from the truth; but she had been 
instructed so to speak to him . 
“What’s this, my little rascal?” exclaims the monk upon catching sight of 
that formidable mes s. “What? Do you dare tell me you are neat and tidy when 
your ass is as filthy as this? Why, by the Virgin, I’m sure ’tis  a fortnight since 
this bum’s been wiped. ’Tis very troubling indeed, for I like things to be clean, 
I do, and it truly looks as if I h ad better look into the situation.”  
While speaking he had deposited Eugénie upon a bed, knelt behind her 
buttocks, and begun to pry them apart with both his hands. One would have 
thought that, at the outset, he purposed simply to observe the state of affai rs, 
which caused him great surprise, but little by little he becomes accustomed to things as they are, sees here a virtue where he had seen only a fault before, sticks out his tongue and moves his head closer, sets to polishing the gem, the 
clods and spots he removes, the pristine object they conceal inflames his senses, 
his prick gets up, his nose, mouth, and tongue seem simultaneously to be at 
work, his ecstasy appears so delicious he is all but deprived of the power to speak, his fuck finally mounts —he grasps his prick, frigs it, and as he 
discharges, finishes cleaning that anus, which is now so fresh and pure one 
would scarcely suppose it had been nasty no more than a minute or two before.  
But the libertine was not yet ready to bring the affair to a conc lusion, this 
voluptuous mania of his constituted a mere preliminary; he gets to his feet, 
bestows further kisses upon his little partner, exposes to her view a great ass of 
very evil aspect and very unclean, and he orders her to give it a thorough 
shaking,  to socratize it; this brings his prick up furiously again, he now returns to Eug énie’s ass, overwhelms it with renewed caresses, lickings, and so forth, 
but what he did after that it is not for me to relate, nor would it properly 
figure in these introduct ory narrations; you will, Messieurs, have the great 
kindness to allow Madame Martaine to tell you of the behavior of a villain 
with whom she was only too well acquainted; and in order to avoid all 
questions, my Lords, which your own regulations forbid me t o treat, or resolve, 
I continue on to another episode . 
“Just one word, Duclos,” said the Duc, who then queried the 
storyteller in an indirect language which enabled her to make lawful 
reply. “Was it big with the monk? Was this Eugénie’s first time? …” 
“Yes,  Sire, the first, and the monk’s was about the size of yours.”  
“Ah, fuck my eyes!” muttered Durcet; “a damned pretty 
demonstration, I’d like to have seen that.”  
You would perhaps have been equally curious , Duclos said as she picked 
up the thread of her nar rative, about the individual who, a few days later, 
passed into my hands. Outfitted with a vessel containing eight or ten great turds gathered from all quarters and whose authors he would have been very 
distressed to have identified, I was with my own hand s to rub him from head 
to toe with this fragrant pomade. Not an inch on his body was neglected, not 
even his face, and when I had massaged his prick, which I frigged at the same 
time, the infamous pig, who all the while stared contentedly at himself in a 
mirror, left evidence of his humble virility between my palms . 
And at last, gentlemen, we have arrived; I can now advise you that the 
homage is about to be made in the veritable temple. I had been told to hold 
myself in readiness, I kept my bowels closed fo r two long days. It was a 
commander of the Order of the Knights of Malta with whom I was to break a lance; he used to see a different girl every morning for these exercises; the 
following scene transpired at his home . 
“Very fair buttocks,” was his opinion as he embraced my behind. “However, 
my child,” he continued, “there’s more to it than simply having a comely ass, you know. That comely ass must know how to shit. Tell me, have you the 
urge?”  
“Such an urge I’m dying to satisfy it, Monsieur,” I confessed . 
“Well, by Jesus, that’s delicious!” exclaimed the commander, “that’s what is 
called excellent service to society, but look here, my little duck, would you like to 
shit in this chamber pot I’m offering you?”  
“In faith, Monsieur,” I made answer, “what with th e need I have to shit, 
I’d do it anywhere, I’d even shit in your mouth.”  
“No! In my mouth, you say? Why, bless me, that is delicious, and that’s 
precisely the place I myself had in mind for you,” he added, setting the pot 
aside. 
“Well, Monsieur, let’s make  haste, bring up your mouth,” said I, “for indeed 
I’ll not be able to hold back much longer.”  
He places himself on the couch, I climb astride him, while operating I frig 
him, he supports my haunches with his hands and receives, piece by piece, 
everything I  deposit in his avid mouth. He is thrilled by it all, nears his 
ecstasy, my wrist is hardly needed to bring forth the floods of semen which 
salute my performance; I frig, conclude my shitting, our man loses himself and his seed altogether, and I leave him delighted with me, or at least so he has the 
kindness to say to Fournier, at the same time requesting the services of another 
girl for the morrow . 
The personage who came next employed more or less the same approach to 
the problem, but simply kept the morse ls in his mouth for a longer period. He reduced them to a fluid, rinsed his mouth with them for a quarter of an hour, 
and spat out little more than dingy water . 
Yet another had, if that is possible, a still more bizarre eccentricity; he liked 
to find four turds in the pot beneath a pierced chair, but those four turds could not be mixed with so much as a single drop of urine. He would be shut up 
alone in the room containing this treasure, never did he allow a girl with him, 
and every precaution had to be tak en to insure his solitude, he could not bear 
the thought he might be observed, and when at last he felt secure he went into 
action; but I am absolutely unable to tell you what he did, for no one had ever 
seen him; all that is known is that when he had left the room, the pot was 
discovered perfectly empty and as tidy as can be. But what he did with his four 
turds only the devil can tell you, if indeed he knows. He may perhaps have 
thrown  them away somewhere, but, then again, he could also have done 
something else with them . 
However, what would lead one to suspect he did not do that something else 
with them is that he left the procuring of those four turds entirely up to Fournier, and never made the least inquiry about their origin. One day, in 
order to observ e whether what we were about to say would alarm him —for 
his alarm might have provided us with a clue about the fate of those turds —
we told him that the ones he had been served that day had come from several persons suffering from syphilis. He laughed good -naturedly with us, was not 
in the slightest disturbed, which reaction was not to be expected from someone 
who had employed rather than cast away the turds. When we sought, upon one 
or two occasions, to push our questions a little further, he bade us be sil ent, and 
never were we to learn more of the matter . 
That concludes what I have to tell you this evening , said Duclos; 
tomorrow I propose to relate my new mode of life, or rather the new turn my 
same mode of life took, when I met Monsieur d’Aucourt; and as for the charming passion you so heavily favor, I hope to have the honor to entertain 
you with examples of it for at least another two or three days . 
Opinions were divided about the fate of the turds in the episode 
Duclos had just recounted, and while argui ng and reasoning about them, 
Messieurs had a few produced for themselves; and the Duc, eager to 
make everyone aware of the taste he was developing for Duclos, 
exhibited to the entire assembly his libertine manner of amusing himself with her, and the dexter ity, aptitude, and promptness, accompanied by 
the most stirring language, wherewith she knew so artfully how to satisfy him. 
Supper and the orgies transpired without any unusual incident, 
nothing of importance took place before the afternoon of the next da y, 
and so we may move directly to the recitations wherewith Duclos brightened the 12th of November.    
THE TWELFTH DAY  
The new mode of life I was about to begin , said Duclos, obliges me to draw 
your attention, Messieurs, to my personal appearance and chara cter at the 
time; one is better able to figure the pleasures being described if one is first 
acquainted with the object that procures them. I had just attained my twenty -
first year. My hair was brown, but nevertheless my skin was of a most 
agreeable whiten ess. The abundance of hair covering my head fell in floating 
and perfectly authentic curls to just above my knees. I had the eyes you behold me now to have, and they have always been judged lovely. My figure was rather full although tall, supple, and graci ous. With what regards my behind, 
that part of the anatomy in which libertines today take such a keen interest, it 
was by common consent superior to the most sublime specimens one is likely 
ever to see, and there were few women in Paris who had an ass as d eliciously 
molded; it was full, round, very plump, and exceedingly soft, generous, I say, but without its ampleness detracting anything from its elegance, the least gesture immediately discovered that heavenly little rosebud you so cherish, 
Messieurs, and which, I do indeed like yourselves believe, is a woman’s most 
magical attraction. Although I had been for a long season active in libertinage, 
my ass could not have been healthier or looked more untried; its splendid 
condition was in part owing to the good  constitution Nature had granted me 
and in part to the extreme prudence I exercised on the battlefield, scrupulously 
avoiding encounters capable of damaging my most precious asset. I had very 
little love for men, I had never had but one attachment; I had a  libertine 
mind , but it was extraordinarily libertine, and after having described my 
charms it is only fitting that I say a word or two about my vices. I love women, Messieurs, I don’t deny it. Not however to the uncommon degree my good colleague, Madame C hampville, loves them; she will very probably tell 
you that she has ruined herself for them; I have simply always preferred them 
to men in my pleasures, and those they have procured me have always exerted 
a more powerful sway over my senses than masculine delights. Apart from this fault, I have had another of adoring to steal: I have refined this mania to an 
unbelievable point. Entirely convinced that all possessions should be equally 
distributed in the world and that it is only strength and violence which are opposed to this equality, foremost law of Nature, I have striven to rectify the 
actual scheme and to do my utmost to re -establish the proper balance. And had 
it not been for this accursed compulsion I might perhaps still be with the 
benevolent mortal o f whom I shall speak next . 
“You say you have done considerable stealing?” said Durcet.  
“An astonishing amount, Monsieur; had I not always spent what I 
filched, I would be wealthy today.”  
“But was there not more to it than that?” the financier pursued. “Som e 
aggravating detail, such as, for instance, forced entry, abuse of confidence, manifest deceit?”  
“Everything under the sun,” Duclos assured him. “I did not think it 
worth dwelling on these matters which would also have disturbed the smooth unfolding of my  history, but since it is evident they might amuse 
you, in future I’ll not forget to cite my thefts.  
“As well as that fault, I have always been reproached for another: I am 
said to have a hard heart, a very bad one indeed; but is that fault really 
mine? or  is it not rather from Nature we have our vices as well as our 
perfections? and is there anything I can do to soften this heart she caused 
to be insensible? I don’t believe I have ever in all my life wept over my 
troubles, and I can safely assure you I hav e never dropped a tear for the 
afflictions of others; I loved my sister, and I lost her without the least twinge of grief, you were witness to the stoic indifference with which I 
greeted news of her undoing; I would, by God, see the universe perish 
without  a sniffle or a sigh.”  
“That is how one must be,” said the Duc, “compassion is a fool’s 
virtue. Close examination reveals that it is never anything but 
compassion which costs us delights. But with that toughened heart of 
yours, you must have committed crim es, for, you know, insensibility 
leads straight to nothing else.”  
“My Lord,” Duclos replied, “the regulations prescribed for our 
narrations prevent me from apprising you of a great many things; my companions will supply what you have ordained I omit. I do have one 
word to say, however: when later on they attempt to represent 
themselves to you as villains, you may be perfectly sure I have never been any better than they.”  
“That, I should say, is doing justice to oneself,” Blangis observed. 
“Well, go on with your tales; we’ll have to be content with what you tell us, for we have ourselves set bounds to your discourses; but remember 
that when we, you and I, have a little chat together, I’ll insist upon 
hearing of your various peccadillos.”  
“And I shall conceal none of them from you, Sire. May it be that after 
having heard me out you shall have no cause to repent of your 
indulgence toward one of the King’s worst subjects.” Wherewith she lifted up her voice and addressed the assembly again:  
Despite all these defec ts, and above all that of being thoroughly 
unappreciative of the value of the humiliating sentiment of gratitude, which I consider as naught but an injurious burden to humanity and one which 
completely degrades the pride and self -respect implanted in us by Nature, with all these deficiencies, I say, my companions were nevertheless very fond of me, 
and of them all I was the most sought after by men . 
Such was my situation when a rich landowner named d’Aucourt came to 
have a party at Fournier’s; as he was one of her steadfast clients, but one who preferred girls brought in from outside the house to those residing in it, he was 
held in the highest esteem, and Madame, who felt I had absolutely to make his 
acquaintance, gave me notice two days beforehand not to wa ste an ounce of the 
precious matter for which he had a greater passion than any of the other men I 
had met with until then; but from the details you will be able to judge of all this for yourselves. D’Aucourt arrived, and having eyed me up and down, he scolded Madame Fournier for having waited so long to supply him with this 
pretty creature. I thanked him for his gallantry, and up we went together. D’Aucourt was about fifty years of age, heavy -set, fat, but his face was 
pleasant to see, there was animation in his features, he was witty and, what 
pleased me most of all about him, he had a gentleness and honesty of character which enchanted me from the first moment . 
“You must have the world’s loveliest ass,” said he, drawing me to him and 
burrowing his hand be neath my skirts. His hand went directly to my behind. 
“I am a connoisseur, and girls of your figure and general look almost 
invariably possess striking asses. Why, look here, didn’t I tell you so?” he 
continued, after briefly palpating the object, “how fre sh and round it is!”  
And nimbly turning me around as with one hand he lifted my skirts to my 
waist and with the other fondled the article, he fell to work examining the altar to which he addressed his prayers . 
“Jesus!” he cried, “by the Saviour, ’tis  really one of the finest asses I have 
clapped eyes on in all my days and, believe me, I have studied many… . 
Spread …Great God, behold that strawberry! …allow me to suck it …devour it…’tis  really a beautiful ass indeed, this one …eh, tell me, dearie, have they 
given  you the instructions?”  
“Yes, Monsieur.” 
“They told you I have them shit?”  
“Yes, Monsieur.” 
“But your health?” went on the capitalist, “there’s nothing amiss?”  
“Never fear, good sir.”  
“It’s simply, d’ye see, that I carry things rather far,” he went on, “an d if you 
have the least illness or symptom, then I run a great risk.”  
“Sir,” said I, “you can do absolutely anything you please, I guarantee you I 
am as fit and sound and safe as a newborn babe; you may act in confidence.”  
After this preamble, d’Aucourt ha d me bend around toward him and, all the 
while keeping my buttocks spread wide, and gluing  his mouth to mine, he 
sucked my saliva for fifteen minutes or so; he withdrew his mouth in order to 
expectorate a little “fuck,” and then returned to his amorous mou th pumping . 
“Spit into my mouth, spit,” he repeated, “from time to time, fill it with 
saliva.”  
And then I felt his tongue run over my gums, drive as far as possible into 
my mouth, and I had the impression it was endeavoring to draw everything 
out of me . 
“Excellent,” said he, “I’m getting stiff. Let’s go to work.”  
Then he fell to contemplating my buttocks again, ordering me to encourage 
the rise of his prick. I pulled out a strange little engine three inches thick and only five long; it was as hard as a cobblestone and full of fire . 
“Remove your skirts,” d’Aucourt told me, “while I take off my breeches; your 
buttocks and mine too have to be thoroughly at their ease for the ceremony we are about to execute.”  
Then, once I had obeyed him : “Lift your blouse furth er up, that’s it, close to your corset,” he continued, 
“and see to it your behind is absolutely disencumbered …. Lie on your stomach 
upon the bed.”  
He fetched up a chair and seated himself by the bed, then returned to 
caressing my bum, the mere sight of whi ch appeared to intoxicate him; he 
spread my buttocks for a moment and I felt his tongue sound deep into my 
entrails, this, said he, in order beyond any shadow of equivocation to verify whether indeed the hen were inclined to lay; I report his own expressio ns to 
you. All this while, I was not touching him, not at that stage, he was himself lightly stroking the dry little member I had just brought from its lair . 
“Are you ready, my child?” he asked. “For it is high time we undertake our 
task; your shit seems t o me as it should be, I’ve established that, remember to 
shit gradually, a little at a time, and always to wait until I have consumed one morsel before pushing out the next. My operation takes quite a while, so 
don’t be in haste. A light slap on your ass w ill notify you that I’m ready for 
more, but see to it that I get no more than a bite”  
Having then adopted the most comfortable position, he glued his mouth to 
the object of his worship, and in less time than it takes to tell I delivered a 
gobbet of shit th e size of a pigeon’s egg. He sucked it, turned it a thousand 
times about in his mouth, chewed it, savored it, at the end of three or four 
minutes I distinctly saw him swallow it; I push again, the same ceremony is 
repeated, and as I had a prodigious charge  to be rid of, ten times over he filled 
his mouth and emptied it, and even after all was done he seemed famished 
still. 
“That is all, Monsieur,” I said when I had finished, “I’m pushing in vain 
now.”  
“It’s all over, is it, my little dear? Why, then I belie ve I’ll discharge, yes, 
discharge while paying my respects to this superb ass. Oh, Great God, what pleasure you give me! I’ve never eaten more delicious shit, I’d swear to that 
before any jury. Give it to me, bring it hither, hither, my angel, bring me you r 
matchless ass to suck, let me devour it.”  
And thrusting what seemed to be twelve inches of tongue through my anus 
and while doing so manualizing himself, the libertine spatters his fuck over 
my legs, not without uttering a host of obscene words and oaths  necessary, 
apparently, to the crowning of his ecstasy.  
When at last it was all over, he sat down, invited me to sit beside him and, 
regarding me with great interest, asked whether I were not tired of the life of 
the brothel and if I should not be pleased to come across someone who would extricate me from it; seeing he had taken a fancy to me, I began to demur, and 
to spare you a long story which could not possibly be of any interest to you, 
after an hour of debating I let myself be won over, and it was dec ided that on 
the following day I would take up quarters in his home in return for twenty  
louis per month and board; that as he was a widower, I could conveniently 
occupy a large apartment in his town house; that I would have a maid to wait upon me and the society of three of his friends and their mistresses with whom 
he got together for libertine suppers four times each week, sometimes at his own 
establishment, sometimes at one of theirs; that my one obligation, and 
occupation, would be to eat a great deal, and always the fare he had served to 
me, because, doing what he did, it were essential I be fed on a diet which 
accorded with his taste —to eat a great deal, I say, to sleep long and soundly in 
order that my digestion be good and thorough, to purge myself regularly once a 
month , and to shit into his mouth twice every day; that this rate of shit 
consumption, or rather of shit production, ought not to frighten me because, by 
stuffing me with food, as he planned to do, I would perhaps hear the call not 
twice b ut three times a day. The capitalist presented me with a very pretty 
diamond in token of his eagerness to conclude the bargain; then he embraced me, told me to settle my affairs with Fournier and to be ready the following 
morning, at which time he would co me to fetch me himself. My farewells were 
quickly said; my heart regretted nothing, for it knew nothing of the art of forming attachments, but my pleasures regretted the loss of Eugénie, with whom for six months I had enjoyed an exceedingly intimate liaiso n; I left. 
D’Aucourt received me with wonderful graciousness and himself took me to the very pretty suite which was to be my new habitation; I was soon fully installed. I was expected, indeed condemned, to eat four meals whence were 
excluded a great number  of things I should have adored having: I had to go 
without fish, oysters, salted meat, eggs, and every kind of dairy product; but on 
the other hand I was so well recompensed that in truth I had no real grounds 
for complaint. The basis of an ordinary repas t consisted of an immense 
quantity of breast of chicken, of boned fowl prepared and presented in every 
imaginable fashion, little beef or other red meat, nothing that contained 
grease, very little bread or fruit. I had to eat these foods even for breakfast  in 
the morning and, in the afternoon, at tea; at these hours, they were served me 
without bread, and d’Aucourt gradually induced me entirely to abstain from 
bread; ever since then I’ve not eaten it at all, and I’ve also given up heavy 
soups. The result of this diet, as my lover had calculated, was two bowel 
movements per day, and the stools were very soft, very sweet, somewhat small 
but, so d’Aucourt maintained, of an exquisite taste which could not be obtained 
by ordinary nourishment; and d’Aucourt was a man whose opinion deserved to be accorded some weight, for he was a connoisseur. Our operations were 
performed when he awoke and when he retired for the night. Their details 
were more or less what I have already given you: he would always begin with 
a prol onged sucking of my mouth, which I had always to present to him in its 
natural state, that is to say, unwashed: I was only allowed to rinse it out 
afterward. He would not, furthermore, discharge every time he dined , our arrangement did not in any way bind him to fidelity. D’Aucourt kept me as 
the pièce de résistance, I was the roast beef, as it were, but that did not 
prevent him from sallying forth every morning for a nibble of lunch somewhere else . 
Two days after I had arrived, his comrades in debauch came  for an evening 
at his home, and as each of the three boasted, in the taste we are presently analyzing, a superficially different although fundamentally identical passion, by your leave, Messieurs, every little example adding to our collection, I shall 
devote a few words to the fantasies in which they indulged themselves . 
The guests arrived. The first was an elderly parliamentarian, in his sixties, 
and named d’Erville; his mistress was a woman of forty, exceedingly 
handsome, and having no visible defect oth er than a certain excess of flesh: her 
name was Madame du Cange. The second was a retired military officer of 
between forty -five and fifty, he was called Desprès, his mistress was an 
attractive young person of twenty -six, blond, and having as lovely a body  as 
you may hope to find: her name was Marianne. The third was an abbot, sixty years old, Du Coudrais by name; his mistress was a lad of sixteen, pretty as a 
star, whom the good ecclesiastic passed off as his nephew . 
The table was laid in that part of the house near my chambers; the meal 
was festive, the fare delicate, and I remarked that the young lady and the youth were on a diet very similar to mine. Characters declared themselves 
while we dined; it was impossible to be more a libertine than d’Erville; h is 
eyes, his speech, his gestures, everything about him proclaimed debauchery, 
libertinage was painted in his every line; there was more of the restrained, the 
deliberate in Desprès, but lust was none the less the soul of his existence; as for 
the abbot, h e was the world’s most arrant, boldest atheist: blasphemies flew 
from his lips with virtually every word he pronounced; with regard to the 
ladies, they emulated their lovers, tattled and chattered a blue streak but in a rather agreeable tone; the young boy struck me as being as great a fool as he 
was a pretty one, and du Cange, who seemed smitten by him, cast a series of 
tender glances toward him, every one of which he failed even to notice . 
All propriety had vanished by the time dessert arrived, and  the co nversation 
had become as filthy as the goings on: d’Erville congratulated d’Aucourt upon 
his latest acquisition and begged to know whether my ass had any merit, and 
if I shitted pleasantly . 
“Oh, by God,” my capitalist replied with a smile, “you’ve only to establish 
the facts for yourself; we hold our goods in common, you know, and lend one another our mistresses quite as willingly as we do our purses.”  
“Why,” d’Erville murmured, “I believe I will have a peek.”  
Taking me by the hand at once, he proposed that  we repair to a closet 
together. As I was hesitating, du Cange raised her brows and said in a rude voice. 
“Be off with you, Mademoiselle, we don’t stand on ceremony here. I’ll look 
after your lover while you’re away.”  
And d’Aucourt, whose eyes I consulted,  having made a sign of approbation, 
I followed the old legislator. ’Tis  he, Messieurs, and the other two as well, who 
are going to offer you the three demonstrations of the taste we are currently 
studying and which should compose the better part of today’s  narration . 
As soon as I was closeted with d’Erville, he, very much warmed by the 
drink he had imbibed, kissed me upon the mouth with extreme enthusiasm, and in so doing belched a few hiccups into my mouth, which nearly made me 
eject from that orifice what , a few minutes later, he seemed to have the most 
pressing desire to see emerge from another. He lifted my skirts, examined my 
behind with all the lubricity of a consummate libertine, then informed me he 
was not at all surprised at d’Aucourt’s choice, for indeed, said he, I had one of 
the most beautiful asses in Paris. He besought me to commence with a few farts, and after he had absorbed a half dozen of them, he returned to kissing 
my mouth, the while fondling me and vigorously spreading my buttocks . 
“Are you beginning to feel the need?” he asked . 
“I feel little else,” I replied . 
“Very well, my pretty child, be so good as to shit upon this dish.”  
He had brought with him one of white porcelain, he held it while I pushed, 
and scrupulously examined the turd as  it emerged from my behind, a delicious 
spectacle which, so he maintained, intoxicated him with pleasure. When I had 
finished, he picked up the plate, ecstatically inhaled the voluptuous product it 
contained, handled, kissed, sniffed the turd, then telling  me he could bear it no 
longer, and that it was now lust wherewith he was drunk thanks to this, the 
most sublime piece of shit he had ever seen, he bade me suck his prick; although 
there was nothing in any way agreeable about this operation, fear of angeri ng 
d’Aucourt by not cooperating with his friend induced me to accede to 
everything. He settled himself in an armchair, or rather sprawled sideways in 
it, having deposited the plate on a neighboring table upon which he also rested half his body, his nose bu ried in the shit; he extended his legs, and I, having 
drawn up a low chair and having pulled from his fly a mere suspicion of a 
very soft prick instead of a real member, despite my repugnance I fell to sucking 
this miserable relic, hoping that a mouthing w ould give it at least a little 
consistency. It did not: once I had taken the wretched object into my mouth, the 
libertine started his operation and thrust into his the pretty little egg, all bright and new, which I had just laid for him; he did not eat it, he battened 
upon it: the game lasted three minutes, during which his squirmings, shudderings, contortions, declared a very ardent and a very expressive delight. 
But it was all in vain, not a trace of solidity appeared in that ugly little stub 
of a tool wh ich, after having wept tears of chagrin into my mouth, withdrew 
itself more ashamed than ever and left its master in that prostration, in that abandon, in that exhaustion which is the certain consequence of a potent 
draught of pleasure . 
“Ah,” said the parl iamentarian, “I forswear my faith; never have I seen 
anyone shit like that.”  
Upon returning to the dining room we found only the abbot and his 
nephew, and as they were operating, I can give you the essential particulars at once. Whereas the others exchanged mistresses in this little society, nothing could induce Du Coudrais to do so: always content with what he had, he never 
accepted a substitute for it; he would not have been able, I was informed, to 
amuse himself with a woman; but in every other respect, he and d’Aucourt 
were alike. He went about his ceremony in the same way, what was more, and 
when we entered the room the youngster was lying belly down upon the edge of 
a divan, presenting his ass to his dear uncle who, kneeling before it, was lovingly rec eiving into his mouth  and steadily consuming all the lad was 
producing, the while frigging an exceedingly small prick we observed dangling between his thighs. The abbot discharged, our presence notwithstanding, and swore that the boy was shitting better wi th every day that passed . 
Marianne and d’Aucourt, who were amusing themselves together, soon 
reappeared and were followed by Desprès and du Cange who, they said, had 
only been cuddling and volleying while waiting for me . 
“Because,” said Desprès, “she and I  are old acquaintances, whereas you, my 
lovely queen, you whom I see for the first time, inspire in me the most ardent desire for a more thorough amusement.”  
“But,” I objected, “Monsieur d’Erville has taken it all; I have nothing more 
to offer you.”  
“Why i ndeed!” he said with a merry laugh, “indeed, I ask nothing from you, 
I’ll furnish all that is needed. I merely require your fingers.”  Curious to learn the meaning of this enigma, I accompany him, and as soon 
as we are alone together, he asks to kiss my ass  for a brief minute. I raise it 
toward him and after two or three licks and sucks at the hole, he unbuttons his 
breeches and bids me do unto him what he has just done in my behalf. His posture excited my suspicions: he was seated facing the back of a chair , by 
clinging to which he kept his balance, and beneath him was a pot waiting to be filled; and so, observing he was ready to perform all by himself, I asked why it were necessary for me to kiss his ass.  
“Nothing could be more necessary, my heart,” he repl ied; “for my ass, in all 
of France the most capricious of asses, never shits save when kissed.”  
I obeyed, but took care to stay clear of danger; perceiving my cautious 
maneuvering : 
“Closer, for God’s sake, get closer, sweetie,” he said in an imperious tone. 
“Are you afraid of a little shit?”  
And so at last, in order to be friendly, I brought my lips to the vicinity of the 
hole; but he no sooner felt them there than he tripped the spring, the eruption was so violent one of my cheeks was splashed from temple to chin. He needed 
but one shot to submerge the plate; never in my life had I seen such a turd: all 
by itself it would easily have filled a very deep salad bowl. Our man snatches 
it up, takes it with him, and lies down on the edge of the bed, presents his 
entirely beshitted ass, and orders me to play with it while he feasts upon what 
has just darted out of his entrails. Filthy as his bum was, I had to obey. “His 
mistress doubtless does as much,” I said to myself; “I must be as obliging as she.” 
I plunge thr ee fingers into the murky aperture pleading for my attentions; our 
man is beside himself with joy, he falls upon his own excrements, daubs his face 
with them, wallows in them, feeds upon them, one of his hands holds the plate, 
the other jostles his prick r ising up majestically between his thighs; I redouble 
my efforts, they are not in vain, I feel his anus contract around my fingers, this reports that his erector muscles are about to launch the seed, the prospect 
delights me, the plate is licked clean, and my partner discharges . 
Once again back in the salon, I find my inconstant d’Aucourt with the 
lovely Marianne; the rascal had also made use of her. The only one who remained was the page boy, with whom, I believe, he might also have come to 
terms had the je alous abbot only consented to relinquish him for half an hour. 
When everyone had returned, they all spoke of removing their clothes and of 
performing a few extravagances in front of each other. The idea struck me as 
excellent, for it would enable me to see  Marianne’s body, which I had the 
greatest desire to examine; it proved delicious, firm, fair, splendidly 
proportioned, and her ass, which I fondled several times in a joking manner, 
seemed to me a veritable masterpiece.  
“What do you want with such a prett y girl?” I asked Desprès. “For the 
pleasure you appear to cherish places no emphasis upon looks.”  
“Ah,” said he, “you don’t know all my mysterious little ways.”  
I was absolutely unable to learn more about them, and although I lived for 
more than a year wit h d’Aucourt, and was present at every get -together, 
neither Desprès nor Marianne wished to clarify anything to me, and I 
remained in entire ignorance of their secret intelligences which, of whatever 
kind they may have been, did not prevent the taste her lo ver used to satisfy 
with me from being an authentic and distinct passion worthy in every respect 
of inclusion in our anthology. Whatever he did with Marianne, I supposed , 
must have been merely episodic and either has been or certainly will be related 
at some one of our sessions . 
After some rather indecent libertine stunts, some farts, yet a few more little 
turds or turdlets, we had considerable talk and sounding impieties on the part of the abbot, who seemed to locate one of his most perfect lecheries in un godly 
conduct and discourse; after all this, everyone put on his clothes again and went off to bed. The next morning, as usual, I appeared in d’Aucourt’s room as 
he was preparing to arise, and neither of us reprimanded the other for our 
little infidelities  of the evening before. He said that, with the exception of 
myself, he knew of no girl who shitted better than did Marianne; I put several 
questions to him, asking what she did with a lover who was so admirably self -
sufficient, and d’Aucourt replied that a ll this was a secret between the two of 
them and they had never seemed willing to disclose it. And we, my own lover and I, went on with our usual little tricks . 
I was not as confined at d’Aucourt’s house as I had been before; I sometimes 
ventured abroad; h e had complete faith, he told me, in my honesty, I could very 
well see what danger I would be exposing him to were I to impair my health, 
and he left me to my own devices. With what regarded the health in which, 
most selfishly, he took such a keen interest, I did nothing to betray his trust, but as for the rest, I considered myself free to do just about everything that would 
earn me any money. And so, being repeatedly solicited by Fournier who was 
eager to arrange parties for me at her establishment, I lent  my talents to every 
project wherefrom I was assured an honorable profit. I was no longer one of 
her crew, I was a young lady kept by a farmer -general; would I have the great 
kindness to give Madame Fournier an hour of my valuable time and pass at 
her esta blishment on such and such a day, etc., etc. You may fancy how well 
that paid. It was in the course of these brief distractions that I encountered the 
new shit worshiper I’ll discuss next . 
“Just one instant,” put in the Bishop. “I did not want to interrupt  you 
until you reached the end of a chapter; you seem to be at one now. 
Would you therefore have the kindness to shed some additional light 
upon two or three essential points in this latest party? When you 
celebrated the orgies after your interview with De sprès, did the abbot, 
who until then had been caressing his bardash only, commit acts of infidelity? In a word, did he lay hands upon you? did the others desert 
their women for the boy?”  
“Monseigneur,” said Duclos, “the abbot never once left his little boy ; 
he scarcely so much as glanced at us even though we were naked and all but on top of him. But he toyed with d’Aucourt’s ass and Desprès’ and 
also d’Erville’s: he kissed them, sucked them, d’Aucourt and d’Erville 
shitted into his mouth and he swallowed th e better part of each of those 
two turds. But he would not touch the women. The same was not true of 
the three other friends relative to his youthful bardash; they kissed him, 
licked his asshole, and Desprès went off alone with him for I have no idea what exercise.”  
“Excellent,” said the Bishop. “You observe that you failed to mention 
everything, and that what you have just recounted forms still another passion, since it figures the taste of a man who has other men shit in his 
mouth, and quite mature men at  that.”  
“That is true, Monseigneur,” Duclos admitted, “I confess my error but 
am not sorry for it, because the soiree has drawn to a close and has indeed been overlong. The bell we are about to hear struck would have 
indicated that I did not have sufficient time to end the story I was 
preparing to begin, and with your gracious leave we will postpone it until 
tomorrow.”  
The bell did indeed ring and as no one had discharged during the 
sitting and as every prick was, however, mightily aloft, they only betook themselves to supper after promising to make good their loss at the 
orgies. But the impetuous Duc was never able to postpone important 
business and having ordered Sophie to present her buttocks, he had 
that lovely child shit, and he swallowed her turd for d essert. Durcet, the 
Bishop, and Curval, all similarly occupied, concluded the same operation, the first with Hyacinthe, the second with Céladon, the third 
with Adonis. The last named, having failed to give ample satisfaction, 
was inscribed in the punishment book, and Curval, swearing like a 
trooper, revenged himself upon Thérèse’s ass, which exploded, at point -blank range, the most ponderous turd imaginable. The orgies 
were eminently libertine and Durcet, forsaking youthful turds, said that for the evening’s games he would have none but what his three old friends could yield him. They humored him with passing fair 
performances, and the little libertine discharged like a stallion while 
devouring Curval’s shit. Night came at last to restore some measure of calm to so much intemperance, and to restore as well our libertines’ 
desires and faculties.    
THE THIRTEENTH DAY  
The Président, who that night lay with Adelaide, his daughter, having 
sported with her until he felt sleep about to claim him, had therewith relegated her to the pallet beside his bed in order that Fanchon might 
have her place, for he was ever eager to have the old duenna by his side 
when lust awoke him, which occurred almost every night; toward three 
in the morning, he opened his eyes with a start  and fell to swearing and 
blaspheming like the true rascal he was. He would at such times be gripped by a lubric furor which now and again became dangerous. That is why he was so fond of having that trusty old Fanchon near him, for no 
one was so skillful a t calming him, whether by offering herself or by 
immediately bringing him one of the objects lying in his bedchamber.  
On that particular night, the Président, instantly recollecting some 
infamies he had perpetrated upon his daughter just before falling asleep, 
called for her at once with the intention of repeating them; but she was not there. Imagine the consternation and the commotion created by such 
an incident. Curval springs from bed in a towering rage, asks where his 
daughter is; candles are lit, everyone hunts about, the place is ransacked, 
nothing’s to be found; the last place searched is the girls’ apartments. 
Every bed is examined, and at last the interesting Adelaide is discovered 
seated in her nightgown near Sophie’s cot. Those two charming girls,  
united by their similarly tender natures, their piety, virtuous sentiments, candor, and absolutely identical amenity, had been seized by the most 
beautiful affection for each other and they were exchanging comforting 
words, consoling one another for the d readful fate that had been 
reserved for them. No one had perceived their commerce until then, but what followed proved that this was not the first time they had got 
together, and it was discovered as well that the elder of the two was 
cultivating the other ’s finer sentiments, and had especially pleaded with 
her not to stray from her religion and her duties toward God, Who 
would one day comfort and console them for all their woes.  
I leave it to the reader to picture Curval’s fury and stormy reaction 
when he located the lovely missionary; he seized her by the hair and, 
overwhelming her with invectives, all very harsh, dragged her to his 
chamber, where he tied her to his bedpost and left her until the next 
morning to ponder over her indiscretion. All of the friends having rushed to the scene, it will also be readily imagined with what haste and 
decision Curval had the two delinquents’ names written down in the 
register. The Duc argued passionately in favor of instantaneous correction, and what he proposed was not by any means mild; but the 
Bishop having countered with a very reasonable objection to what his 
brother was urged to do, Durcet was content simply to include them on the agenda. There was no way of attacking the duennas; they were all 
four bedded in Mess ieurs’ chambers that night. This fact accounted for 
the imperfect administration of the household, and arrangements were 
made whereby, in future, there would always be at least one duenna in the girls’ quarters and another in the boys’. Their lordships ret ired to bed 
again, and Curval, whom anger had rendered more than cruelly 
impudicious, did things to his daughter we cannot yet describe, but 
which, by precipitating his discharge, at least put him quietly to sleep.  
All the hens in the chicken coop had been  so terrified that, on the 
morrow, no misbehavior was discovered, and amongst the boys, only Narcisse, whom, the evening before, Curval had forbidden to wipe his 
ass, wishing to have it nicely beshitted at coffee, which this child was scheduled to serve, a nd who had unfortunately forgot his instructions, 
only Narcisse, I say, had cleaned his anus and he had done so with 
extreme care. It was in vain the little chap explained that his mistake 
could be repaired, since, said he, he wanted to shit there and then ; he 
was told to keep what he had, and that he would be none the less 
inscribed in the fatal book; which inscription the redoubtable Durcet 
instantly performed before his eyes, thus to make him sense all the enormity of his fault, a veritable sin and possibly by itself capable of 
upsetting or, who knows? of preventing Monsieur le Président’s 
discharge.  
Constance, whom they did not hinder because of her state, 
Desgranges, and Bum -Cleaver were the only ones who were granted 
chapel permission; everyone else re ceived the order not to draw the cork 
until the evening toasts.  
The preceding night’s events provided the dinner’s conversation; they 
made game of the Président for permitting the bird to fly from its cage, etc.; some champagne restored his gay spirits, an d the company sallied 
forth to coffee. Narcisse, Céladon, and Zelmire distributed it, so did 
Sophie, who was greatly ashamed of herself; she was asked how often 
the thing had happened, she replied that it had occurred only twice, and 
that Madame de Durcet gave her such good counsel that indeed she 
thought it most unjust to punish them both for it. The Président assured her that what she called good counsel was, in her situation, the very 
worst, that the devotion wherewith Madame de Durcet had been filling 
her head would serve no purpose save to get her punished every day, and 
that, in her present circumstances, she was to have no masters and no 
gods save his three confreres and himself, no religion save that of blindly 
serving and obeying them in everything.  And, all the while he was delivering this sermon, he had her kneel between his legs and bade her 
suck his prick, which the poor little thing did all atremble. As always 
partisan to thigh -fuckery, the Duc, obliged as he was to abstain from the 
capital prac tice, impaled Zelmire in this style, meanwhile having the 
little girl shit in his cupped hand and gobbling it up as quickly as it was 
received, and all that while Durcet was inducing Céladon to discharge 
into his mouth, and the Bishop was industriously ext racting a turd from 
Narcisse. A few minutes, no more; were set aside for the nap that they 
found such an aid to digestion; then, having taken up their posts in the 
auditorium, Duclos faced the gathering and began the day’s narrative.  
The gallant octogenari an Fournier had in mind for me, Messieurs, was an 
official from the auditing bureau, short, pudgy, and with an extremely unpleasant face. He set a pot between us, we  squatted down back to back and 
shitted simultaneously; he seizes up the pot, with his fing ers stirs the two turds, 
mixes them, swallows the batter while I promote his discharge, an eruption which takes place in my mouth. He barely even glanced at my behind. Nor did he do any kissing, but his ecstasy was very sharp and compelling all the same: 
he pranced all about the room, swearing while he gulped and ejaculated, and 
then took himself off, giving me four louis for this strange ceremony . 
However, my landowner became more fond of me with each passing day, 
and more trusting too, and this trust, whi ch I lost no time in abusing, soon 
became the cause of our eternal separation …. One day when he had left me 
alone in his library, I noticed that, before going out for the day, he had filled his purse with money taken from a deep drawer entirely filled with gold. “Ah, 
what a capture!” I said to myself, and having from that very instant conceived 
the idea of making off with this sum, I set to watching for the means and 
opportunity whereby to appropriate it: d’Aucourt never locked the drawer, but 
he carried wi th him the key to his library, and having discovered that this door and lock were both very frail, I fancied it would take little effort to break the 
one and the other. Having adopted the plan, I concentrated upon nothing but 
taking advantage of the first time d’Aucourt was absent the entire day; that 
used to be the case twice a week, when he went off for private bacchanals in the company of Desprès and the abbot; Madame Desgranges will perhaps 
describe what occurred during these outings, they lie beyond my province. The 
favorable moment was soon at hand; d’Aucourt’s valets, as libertine as their 
master, never failed to go with him to these parties, and so I found myself 
almost alone in the house. Full of impatience to put my project into execution, 
I go str aightway to the door of the library, break the thin panel with a blow of 
my fist, rush to the drawer, find it unlocked as I knew it would be. I remove 
everything it contains; my prize amounts to not less than three thousand  louis. 
I fill my pockets, rifle other drawers; a splendid jewel case catches my eye, I pick 
it up, but what was I not to find in the other drawers of that bountiful 
secretary! …Fortunate d’Aucourt! What great good luck for you that your 
imprudence was not discovered by anyone else but me;  the secretary contained 
enough to have had him  broken on the wheel, Messieurs, that is all I can tell 
you. Quite apart from the transparent and expressive notes addressed to him 
by Desprès and the abbot pertaining to their secret commerce, there was every 
kind of furniture needed for the performing of those infamies …. But I halt 
myself here; the boundaries you have prescribed to my depositions prevent me 
from saying more; Desgranges will treat the whole matter. As for myself, the theft once effected, I lef t at once, shuddering to think of all the dangers I had 
perhaps been exposing myself to by frequenting the company of such scoundrels. I crossed over to London and, as my sojourn in that city, where for six months 
I dwelt in the most comfortable style, off ers nothing that could be of any 
outstanding interest to your Lordships, you will permit me to pass quickly over 
this part of my story. I had maintained contact with no one in Paris but Fournier; however, she advised me of the hue and cry the landowner had  
raised over this paltry little robbery, and I finally resolved to put an end to this 
blathering: I took up pen and paper and very coolly informed him that she who 
had happened upon his money had also discovered other things, and that if he were determined  to continue to search for the culprit, I would as bravely as 
possible endure my fate and very certainly depose, with the same judge who would question me upon what I had done with the contents of the small drawers, a detailed statement of what I had found  in the larger ones. Our man 
fell as silent as a tomb; and as six months later their three -partied debauchery 
came broadly to light and as they themselves left France for security abroad, I returned to Paris and, must I avow my misbehavior? I returned, Mes sieurs, as 
poor as I had been before dispossessing d’Aucourt, and such were my straits I was obliged to put myself back in Madame Fournier’s safekeeping. As I was no more than twenty -three at the time, I did not want for adventures; I am 
going to ignore th ose exterior to my domain and recount, with your Lordships’ 
indulgent permission, only the ones wherein I know now that you take some interest . 
A week after my return, a barrel brimming with shit was placed in the 
chamber appointed for pleasures. My Adonis  arrives; he proved to be a saintly 
ecclesiastic, but one so habituated to those pleasures, so blasé, that he was no 
longer capable of being stirred  save by the excesses I shall describe. I was naked 
when he entered. For a moment he regards my buttocks, then, after having 
fingered them rather brutally, he tells me to undress him and help him get into 
the barrel. I remove his garments, aid him to climb in, the old pig slides down 
into his element; a hole has been specially bored for the purpose and, fifteen 
seconds after having immersed himself, his prick, almost stiff, pops through the 
aperture; he orders me to frig it, covered as it is with filth and horrors. I do as I 
am told, he ducks his head down into the shit, splashes in shit, swallows shit, shouts, d ischarges, and, clambering out, trots off to immerse himself in a bath, 
where I leave him in the hands of two house servants who spend a quarter of 
an hour scrubbing him clean . 
Another one appeared shortly afterward. I had shitted and pissed into a pot 
a week before and had carefully preserved the mixture; this period was 
necessary before matters reached the stage our latest libertine desired. He was a 
man of thirty -five, and my guess was that he was connected with finance. 
Upon entering he asked where the pot was; I handed it to him, he sniffed it 
experimentally.  
“You’re perfectly certain that was done a week ago?” he asked . 
“Monsieur,” I replied, “I am prepared to answer for its age; you will notice 
the first signs of mildew there, some moldiness near the edge.”  
“Why, indeed, it looks as if it will do very nicely,” he agreed, “it’s the mold I 
adore, you know. Never too moldy to suit me. Show me, if you please,” he continued, “the pretty ass that shitted what we have here.”  
I presented it . 
“That’s it,” said he, “put it right there opposite me so that I can see it while 
eating its creation.”  
We arrange ourselves, he samples a little tidbit, is thrilled by the taste, 
plunges directly ahead, and in no time has devoured that exquisite lunch, only interrupting his  chewing to scan my bum; but there was no other episode, he 
did not even draw his prick from his breeches . 
A month passed, another unusual fellow came to our door, and this one 
would deal with none but Fournier herself. What an object he selected, Great 
God! she had seen sixty -eight summers, an erysipelas was eating every inch of 
her hide, and the eight rotten teeth decorating her mouth communicated so 
fetid an odor it was all but impossible to speak with her at a distance of under 
five yards; but it was th ese shortcomings and nothing else that enchanted the lover with whom she was to take a tumble. Most eager to observe the contest, I 
run to the spy hole: the Adonis was an elderly doctor, but younger nevertheless 
than she. He takes her in his arms, kisses h er mouth for a good fifteen minutes, 
then, having her present an ancient, wrinkled ass such as you see on a very old 
cow, he kisses and sucks it avidly. A syringe is brought in, three half bottles of 
liqueur too; Aesculapius’ worshiper loads his syringe an d pumps the healing 
drink into the entrails of his Iris; she receives the potion, holds it, the doctor 
does not cease kissing her, he licks every square inch of her body . 
“Ah, my friend,” the old lady cries at last, “I can contain myself no longer, 
not ano ther second, prepare yourself, dear friend, I’m going to have to give it 
back.”  
Salerno’s scholar kneels, from his fly pulls forth a dark, wrinkled stub of a 
device, which he pounds and coaxes with emphasis, Fournier settles her great ugly ass upon his mou th, pushes, the doctor imbibes, a turd or two doubtless 
emerge with the liquid, he gasps but it all goes down, the libertine discharges and falls backward, dead drunk. ’Twas  thus this debauchee satisfied two 
passions at a single stroke: his wine bibbery an d his lewdness . 
“One moment,” said Durcet. “Those excesses always give me an 
erection. Desgranges,” he pursued, “I fancy you possess an ass closely resembling the one Duclos has just figured; come apply it to my face.”  
The old procuress obeyed.  
“Let it go,  release it,” Durcet said in a muffled voice, for he was 
speaking from between that pair of awe -inspiring buttocks. “Give it to 
me, buggeress , never mind if it’s not liquid, I am perfectly able to chew, 
and I always swallow whatever comes my way.”  
And the operation was concluded while the Bishop was performing a 
similar one with Antinoüs, Curval with Fanchon, and the Duc with Louison. But our four athletes, fully acquainted with all these extravagances and totally at their ease while committing them, 
perfor med with absolute effortlessness and even nonchalance: the four 
deposits were consumed without a single drop of fuck being shed in any quarter.  
“Well, on with your story, Duclos, finish up for the day,” the Duc 
said; “if we are no more tranquil than before , we are at least less 
impatient and better able to pay attention.”  
“Alas, Messieurs,” our heroine answered, “I fear that the anecdote I 
have still to relate this evening is far too simple, too mild for the state you are in. ’Tis  a pity, but no matter; its  turn has come, it must keep its 
place.” And she continued as follows:  
The hero of the adventure was an old brigadier in the King’s army; he had 
to be stripped to the skin, then swaddled like an infant; when he was thus prepared, I had to shit while he loo ked on, bring him the plate and, with the 
tips of my fingers, feed him my turd as if it were pap. Everything is done according to prescription, our libertine swallows it all and discharges in his swaddling clothes, the while simulating a baby’s cry . 
“Let u s then have recourse to children,” said the Duc, “since you leave 
us with a children’s story; Fanny, my dear,” he continued, “come to your old friend and shit in his mouth, and remember to suck his prick while 
you are about it, for it seems to have to disc harge again.”  
“Let thy will be done,” murmured the Bishop. “Come hither, Rosette; 
you have heard the orders given to Fanny. Then do as she.”  
“May the same orders apply to you,” Durcet said to Hébé, who 
responded to his call.  “When in Rome,” said the wise Curval, “do as the Romans do, my 
little one. Augustine, emulate your companions, cause simultaneously to 
flow both my fuck into your mouth and your shit into mine.”  
And all these things were done; upon this occasion, all those 
worthies came; from everywhere  the sounds of farting and falling shit 
were to be heard, discharges too, and, much lust sated, they betook 
themselves to the table, their appetite was passing strong. But at the 
orgies, refinements were employed, the little ones were sent off to bed. 
Thos e delicious hours were spent with none but the elite fuckers, the 
four ladies -in-waiting, the four storytellers. Messieurs became 
completely drunk and performed horrors of such absolute filthiness that 
I should not be able to describe them without doing an injustice to the 
less libertine tableaux I have yet to offer my readers. Curval and Durcet 
were carried away unconscious, but the Duc and the Bishop, quite as 
cool as if nothing had happened, were perfectly able to pass the rest of 
the night indulging in their ordinary riot.    
THE FOURTEENTH DAY  
It was discovered upon that day that the weather had lent its approval to 
our libertines’ infamous enterprises, and had removed them to an even greater distance from the probability they would be spied upon by mor tal 
eyes; an immense blanket of snow had fallen, it filled the surrounding 
vale, seeming to forbid even to wild beasts access to our scoundrels’ 
retreat; of all human beings, there was not one that existed who could 
dare hope to reach where they lay fast. Ah, it is not readily to be 
imagined how much voluptuousness, lust, fierce joy are flattered by those sureties, or what is meant when one is able to say to oneself: “I am alone 
here, I am at the world’s end, withheld from every gaze, here no one can 
reach me, there is no creature that can come nigh where I am; no limits, 
hence, no barriers; I am free.” Whereupon, thus situate, desires spring 
forth with an impetuosity which knows no bounds, stops at nothing, and 
the impunity that electrifies them most delici ously increases all their 
drunkenness. There, nothing exists save God and one’s conscience; well, 
what weight may the former exert, of what account may God be in the 
eyes of an atheist in heart and brain? and what sway is the conscience to 
enjoy, what infl uence upon him who is so accustomed to vanquishing 
remorse, routing guilt, that so to do becomes for him a game, nay, a little 
pleasure? Luckless flock delivered to the murderous tooth of such 
villains; how would you have trembled had you not still been in  
ignorance of what lay in store for you!  
That day was a festival, the second week had ended, the second 
marriage was to be celebrated; Messieurs were in a glad humor and 
thought not but to frolic on that holiday. The marriage to take place was that of Narc isse and Hébé, but, cruel fate! it was also decreed that the 
bride and groom were both doomed to be punished that same evening; 
and thus, from the warm embrace of hymeneal pleasures they were to 
move directly to the more bitter lessons taught in this school, how unkind! Little Narcisse, who was not a dull fellow, remarked this irony, 
but Messieurs none the less proceeded to the usual ceremonies. The 
Bishop officiated, the couple was conjoined in very holy matrimony, and they were permitted to do to each oth er, before the public’s eyes, all they 
wanted to do; but, who would have believed it? the order was of a too liberal scope, or too well understood, and the little husband, who had an aptitude for learning, perfectly delighted with the prospect before him 
but unable to introduce himself into his pretty wife, was however about 
to deflower her with his fingers, and would have, had he been given his way. Firm hands intervened just in time, and the Duc, making off with 
Hébé, thigh -fucked her on the spot, while t he Bishop did likewise with 
Narcisse.  
Dinner came next, the newly -wedded couple were admitted to the 
feast, and as they had been given and commanded prodigiously to eat, 
both upon leaving the table shitted handsomely, one for Durcet’s benefit 
the other for  Curval’s, who, after having swallowed those little products 
of childhood, smacked their lips and declared ’twas  delicious.  
Coffee was served by Augustine, Fanny, Céladon, and Zéphyr. The 
Duc bade Augustine frig Zéphyr, and the latter shit in the nobleman’s 
mouth at the same time he discharged; the operation was a stunning 
success, so much so that the Bishop wanted to duplicate it with Céladon; 
Fanny attended to the frigging, and the little fellow received orders to 
shit in Monseigneur’s mouth the moment he  felt his fuck flow. But the 
young operatives succeeded less brilliantly than had their companions: Céladon was never able to coordinate his shitting with his discharge; 
however, as this exercise was merely a test of skill, and as the regulations 
made no m ention of the subjects being obliged to excel in it, no 
punishment was inflicted upon him.  
Durcet gleaned shit from Augustine, and the Bishop, firmly erect, had 
Fanny suck him while she shat in his mouth; he discharged, and as his 
crisis was violent, he br utalized Fanny somewhat but, unhappily, failed 
to find adequate grounds for having her punished, great as was his 
apparent wish to arrange something for her. A greater tease than the 
Bishop never lived; no sooner would he finish discharging than he would wish for nothing better than to see his pleasure -object gone to the devil; 
everyone was familiar with his character, and the little girls, the wives, and the little boys dreaded nothing as much as helping him to be rid of his fuck.  
The midday nap over, they passed into the auditorium, the company 
distributed itself, and Duclos resumed the thread of her narrative:  
I sometimes used to go into town for parties , said she, and as they were 
usually more lucrative, Fournier did her best to procure as many of that k ind 
as she could . 
She once sent me to the home of an elderly Knight of Malta who opened a 
kind of wardrobe filled with cubbyholes, each of which housed a porcelain chamber pot containing a turd; the old rake had made arrangements with a sister of his, abbe ss of one of the most considerable convents in Paris; that 
obliging girl, upon his request, every morning sent him a crate of fresh shit 
produced by her prettiest little  pensionnaires. He filed away each performance 
according to a classifying system, and w hen I arrived he bade me take down 
such and such a number, and it proved to be the most venerable. I presented 
the pot to him . “Oh yes,” said he, “that belongs to a girl of sixteen, lovely as the day. Frig 
me while I eat her gift.”  
The entire ceremony cons isted in twiddling his device and in dressing my 
bum before his eyes while he ate, then in replenishing the pot he had just 
emptied. He watched me do it, wiped my asshole clean with his tongue, and 
discharged while sucking my anus. After that, the wardrobe  is closed and 
locked, I receive my pay, and our man, whom I visited at an early hour in the 
morning, curls up and goes blissfully back to sleep . 
Another, more extraordinary in my opinion, was an elderly monk. He 
enters, demands eight or ten turds from the  first person he sees, girl or boy, it’s 
all the same to him. He mixes them into a paste which he next kneads like 
dough, bites into the lump and, eating at least half of it, discharges into my 
mouth . 
A third, and of all the men I have met in my life he ar oused the greatest 
disgust in me, a third, I say, ordered me to open my mouth wide. I was naked, lying upon a mattress on the floor, and he was astride me; he popped his stool into my mouth and the villain then lay down beside me, ate what I spat out, 
and sprayed his fuck over my teats . 
“Well, well, that’s a pleasant one!” cried Curval; “by Jesus, I do indeed 
believe I want to shit, I really must try to. Whom shall I take, Monsieur le Duc?”  
“Who?” said Blangis. “By my faith, I recommend Julie, my daughter; 
she is right there under your hand. You are fond of her mouth, put it to use.” 
“Thank you for the advice,” said Julie sullenly. “What have I done to 
have you say such things?”  “Why, since the idea upsets her,” said the Duc, “and since she’s a good 
girl, ta ke Mademoiselle Sophie: she’s healthy, pretty, and she’s only 
fourteen, you know.”  
“Very well, it’s to be Sophie, that’s decided,” said Curval, whose 
turbulent prick was beginning to gesticulate.  
Fanchon approaches the victim, the poor little wretch’s tear s start to 
fall at once. Curval laughs lightly, brings up his great, ugly, and dirty 
behind, pushes it down upon that charming visage, and gives us the 
image of a toad about to insult a rose. He is frigged, the bomb bursts, 
Sophie loses not so much as a cr umb, and the crapulous magistrate’s 
tongue and lips reclaim what he has launched; he swallows it all in just 
four mouthfuls while his prick is being rubbed upon the belly of the poor 
little creature who, the operation once over, vomits her very guts out, and directly upon the nose of Durcet who has come up posthaste to miss 
nothing, and who is frigging himself while being covered.  
“Off you go, Duclos!” said Curval. “On with your tales, and rejoice at 
the effect of your discourses; do they not carry the day? ” 
And therewith Duclos resumed, warmed to the very cockles of her 
heart by the staggering success which had greeted her anecdote.  
The man with whom I held correspondence directly after the one whose 
example has just seduced you , said Duclos, insisted that the woman he was 
presented have indigestion; in consequence, Fournier, who had given me no 
foreknowledge of the thing, had me, during dinner, swallow a certain laxative drug which softened what my bowels contained, indeed rendered it fluid, as if 
my stool had become transformed into the effect of an enema. Our man arrives 
and after several preliminary kisses bestowed upon the object of his whole 
veneration, which, by now, was becoming painfully inflated by gases, I beseech 
him to start without further delay ; the injection is ready to escape, I grasp his prick, he pants, swallows everything, asks for still more; I furnish him with a 
second deluge, it is soon followed by a third, and the libertine’s anchovy finally 
spits upon my fingers the unequivocal evidenc e of the sensation he has received . 
The next day I treated with a personage whose baroque mania will perhaps 
find some worshipers amongst yourselves, Messieurs. First of all, he was 
installed in the room next to the one in which we ordinarily operated and in 
whose wall was that hole so conveniently placed for observations. He was left alone to arrange himself; a second actor awaited me in the adjoining chamber: 
he was a cab driver we had picked up at random and who was fully apprised 
of the situation; as I was too, our cast knew the various roles to perfection. It was a question of having the Pha ëthon shit squarely opposite the hole, so that 
the libertine hidden on the other side of the partition would miss nothing involved in the spectacle. I catch the turd  upon a plate, see to it that it lands 
intact, spread the driver’s buttocks, press around his anus, I neglect nothing 
that can make shitting comfortable; as soon as my man has done all he has to 
do, I snatch up his prick and get him to discharge over the s hit, and all that 
well within sight of our observer; finally, the package ready, I dash into the 
other room . 
“Here you are, take it quickly, Monsieur,” I exclaim, “it’s nice and warm.”  
There is no necessity to repeat the invitation; he grasps the dish, off ers me 
his prick, which I frig, and the rascal bolts everything I tender him while he 
exhales his fuck in tune with my diligent hand’s elastic movements . 
“And what was the driver’s age?” Curval asked.  
“About thirty,” Duclos answered.  
“Why, that’s nothing a t all,” said Curval. “Durcet there will tell you 
whenever you like that we once knew an individual who did the same 
thing, and with positively the same attendant circumstances, but with a man of sixty or seventy who had to be found in the lowest sewer of 
misery and filth.”  
“And, you know,” said Durcet, “it’s only pretty that way.” The 
financier’s little engine had been gradually lifting its head ever since Sophie’s aspersion. “I shall at any given time be happy to do it with the 
eldest of veterans.”  
“You’re  stiff, Durcet,” said the Duc, “don’t deny it, for I know you: 
whenever you start that nasty boasting it’s because your fuck is coming to 
a boil. So hold, good friend; though not so seasoned in years as you 
might like, still, to appease your intemperance, I offer you all I have in my entrails, and I believe you will find it enough to make a meal upon.”  
“Ah, by God’s belly!” cried Durcet, “you always serve your guests well, 
my dear Duc.”  
The Duc entering Durcet’s alcove, the latter kneels down before the 
buttocks which are to fill him to overflowing with good cheer; the Duc 
grunts once, twice, a prodigy tumbles out, the banker swallows and, transported by this crapulous excess, discharges while swearing he has 
never tasted so much pleasure.  
“Duclos,” said the  Duc, “come do for me what I have done for our 
good friend.”  
“My Lord,” our storyteller replied, “you will recall that I did it this 
morning, and that you swallowed it.”  
“Why, yes, ’tis  true,” the Duc admitted. “Very well then, hither, 
Martaine, I must hav e recourse to you, for I want none of those 
children’s asses; I feel my fuck readying to come, but, you know, it comes 
reluctantly, and so we need something out of the ordinary.”  
But Martaine’s case was that of Duclos, Curval had gobbled her shit 
that morn ing. “What! by fuck,” cried the Duc, “am I then to fail to find a turd this 
evening?”  
Whereupon Thérèse advanced and offered the dirtiest, the broadest, 
and the most stinking possible of asses you, dear reader, may hope to 
behold.  
“Well, that will do, that  will do perfectly,” said the Duc, assuming the 
posture, “and if in my present disorder this infamous ass I’ve got here does not produce its effect, I don’t know what I’ll have to resort to.”  
Dramatic moment: Thérèse pushes; the Duc receives! and the incen se 
was quite as dreadful as the temple whence it emerged, but when one is as stiff as the Duc was stiff, ’tis  never excess of filth one complains of. 
Drunk with joy, the scoundrel swallowed every ounce, and directly into Duclos’ face, for she was frigging him, shot the most indubitable proof of his male vigor.  
Then to table; the ensuing orgies were devoted to the distribution of 
justice; that week there were seven delinquents: Zelmire, Colombe, Hébé, Adonis, Adelaide, Sophie, and Narcisse; the gentle Adelai de was 
granted no quarter. Zelmire and Sophie also bore away a few marks of 
the treatment they had undergone and, without giving further 
particulars, since circumstances do not permit us to give them yet, 
everyone retired to bed, and in Morpheus’ arms reco vered the strength 
requisite to make further sacrifices to Venus.    
THE FIFTEENTH DAY  
Rarely would the day following correction offer fresh signs of 
misbehavior. There were none upon this one, but as strict as ever in the article of permission to shit in the morning, Messieurs granted this favor 
to no one but Hercule, Michette, Sophie, and Desgranges, and Curval 
came perilously near to discharging while watching the storyteller at 
work. Not overmuch was accomplished at coffee, the friends were 
content to fondle buttocks and to suck one or two assholes; the hour 
sounded, everyone went promptly to establish himself in the amphitheater. Duclos faced her audience once again and addressed the 
company in this wise:  
There had lately come to Fournier’s a little gir l of twelve or thirteen, the age 
preferred by that singular gentleman I mentioned to you; but I truly doubt whether in a very long time he had debauched anything so cunning, so 
innocent, or so pretty. She had fair hair, was tall for her years and fit to be  
painted, her physiognomy was tender and voluptuous, her eyes the loveliest one 
could hope to see, and in all her charming person there was something sweet 
and intriguing which turned her into a very enchantress. But what was the 
degradation to which such a host of attractions was about to be subjected! and 
how shameful was the debut being prepared for them! She was the daughter of a tradesman in lingerie, purveyor to the Palace and a man of comfortable means, and his daughter surely had been destined for a happier fate than this 
of playing the whore; but the more the man of whom it is a  question was able, 
by means of his perfidious seductions, to beguile his victims to their ruin, and 
the more thorough the depravation into which he guided them, the greater his 
pleasure, the fiercer his ecstasy. Little Lucile, directly after her arrival, was scheduled to satisfy the disgusting and unclean caprices of a man who, not 
merely content to have the most crapulous tastes, wished, still better, to inflict 
them upon a maid . 
He arrives at the house: he proves to be an old notary stuffed with gold and 
who, together with his wealth, has all the brutality that avarice and luxury 
excite when combined in a seasoned spirit. The child is exhibited to him; pretty 
as she may be, his first reaction is disdain; he grumbles, he grits his teeth, mutters and swears, and says that it damned well seems as if one can no longer 
find a pretty girl in Paris; he demands, at last, whether there is proof positive 
she is a virgin, he is assured that, yes, the article is mint, Fournier offers to 
show it to him . 
“What? look at a cunt, I? Madame Fournier! I, look at a cunt! I certainly 
hope you propose the thing in jest; have you noticed me spending much time considering those objects since I have b een coming to you? I use them, to be 
sure, but in a manner which, I believe, attests no great fondness for them .” 
“Very well, Monsieur,” Fournier said, “you will have to take the house’s 
word for it: I declare that she is as much a maid as a child born fiv e minutes 
ago.” 
They go upstairs together and, as you may well conceive, curious about the 
forthcoming tête -à-tête, I go and establish myself at the hole. Poor little Lucile 
was overcome by a shame only to be described by superlative expressions, hence not to be described at all, for those expressions are needed to represent the 
impudence, the brutality, and the ill -humor of her sixty -year-old lover . 
“Well, what the devil are you doing there, are you a stone?” says he in a 
harsh voice. “Do I have to tell you to get your skirts up? I should have been 
looking at your ass two hours ago …. Don’t stand there like an idiot, move.”  
“But, Monsieur, what am I to do?”  “Why, Jesus Christ, are such questions still asked? What are you to do? Pick 
up your skirts and show m e that damned ass I’m paying to see.”  
Lucile obeys, trembling like a leaf, and discloses a little white ass just as 
darling and sweet as would be that of Venus herself . 
“Hum …looks all right,” mutters the brute, “bring it nearer ….” 
Then, getting a firm grip  upon the two buttocks and separating them 
forcefully : 
“You’re damned certain no one’s ever done anything to you here ?” 
“Oh, Monsieur, no one has ever touched me ….” 
“Very well. Now fart .” 
“But, Monsieur, I can’t .” 
“Well, try, for Christ’s sake, make yourse lf fart.”  
She struggles, frowns, squints, a little breath of aromatic wind does escape 
and produces a little echo upon entering the infected mouth of the old libertine, 
who seems delighted . 
“Do you want to shit?” he asks . 
“No, Monsieur .” 
“Well, I do, I’ve something copious to get rid of, if you’re interested in the 
pertinent facts; so prepare yourself to satisfy this particular need of mine…take 
off your skirts .” 
They are removed . 
“Lie down upon that sofa. Raise your thighs .” 
Lucile settles herself, the old  notary arranges and poses her so that her wide -
flung legs display her cunt to the fullest advantage, in which open and prominent position it may be readily employed as a chamber pot. So to use it 
was his heavenly intention; in order that the container res pond more perfectly 
to what is to be demanded of it, he begins by widening it as much as possible, 
devoting both hands and all his strength to the task. He takes his place, pushes, a turd lands in the sanctuary Cupid himself would not have disdained having  
for a temple. He turns around, eyes his work, and with his fingers presses and 
thrusts the filthy excrement into the vagina and largely out of sight; he 
establishes himself astride Lucile once again, and ejects a second, then a third stool, and each is su cceeded by the same ceremony of burial. Finally, having 
deposited his last turd, he inserts and tamps it down with such brutal zeal that the little one utters a cry, and by means of this disagreeable operation perhaps loses the precious flower, Nature’s or nament , offered the child as a gift to 
Hymen. This was the moment at which our libertine’s pleasure attained its crisis: to have filled the young and pretty cunt to overflowing with shit, to crowd it with shit and stuff it with yet more, that was his supre me delight: all 
the while in action, he opens his fly and draws out a species of prick, very flaccid it is, and he shakes it, and as he toils away in his disgusting manner, he manages to spatter upon the floor a few drops of thin, discolored sperm, whose 
loss may be credited solely to the infamies he has been performing. Having 
concluded his business, he takes himself off, Lucile washes, and that is that . 
Some time later, I found myself with another individual whose mania 
struck me as no less unpleasant: he  was an elderly magistrate at the high court. 
One was obliged not only to watch him shit, no, there was more to it than 
that: I had to help him, with my fingers, facilitate the matter’s emergence by pressing, opening, agitating, compressing his anus, and w hen once he had been 
freed of his burden, I had with utmost care to clean the soiled area with my 
tongue . 
“Well, by God! there’s a bit of taxing drudgery, I own,” said the 
Bishop. “The four ladies you see here, and they are our wives, or our daughters, or our nieces, these ladies nevertheless have to perform that 
same chore every day, you know. And what the devil, I ask you, what the 
devil is a woman’s tongue good for if not to wipe assholes? I frankly cannot think of any other use to put it to. Constance,”  the Bishop 
pursued, turning to the Duc’s lovely wife, who happened to be upon his 
couch, “give Duclos a little demonstration of your proficiency in the 
thing; here you are, I’ll offer you a very untidy ass, it hasn’t been cleaned since this morning, I’ve been keeping it this way for you. Off you go, 
display your abilities.”  
And the poor creature, only too well accustomed to these horrors, 
executed them as a dutiful, a thoughtful wife should; ah, great God! 
what will not dread and thralldom produce!  
“Oh, by  Jesus,” said Curval, presenting his ugly, beslimed asshole to 
the charming Aline, “she’ll not be the only one to give examples of 
excellence. Get to work, little whore,” said he to that beautiful and 
virtuous girl, “outdo your companion.”  
And the thing wa s accomplished.  
“Why, Duclos,” said the Bishop, “I think we might proceed now; we 
only wished to point out that your man’s request had nothing of the unusual about it, and that a woman’s tongue is fit for nothing if not to 
wipe an ass.”  
The amiable Duclos fell to laughing and continued:  
You will permit me, Messieurs , said she, to interrupt the catalogue of 
passions for an instant that I may apprise you of an event which has no 
bearing upon them; it has only to do with me, but as you have ordered me to recou nt the interesting episodes in my life, even when they are not related to 
the anthology of tastes we are compiling, I think that the following ought not 
be passed by in silence . 
I had been a great while at Madame Fournier’s, had long since become the 
first ranked according to seniority, and in her entire entourage was the girl in 
whom she had the greatest confidence. It was I who most often arranged the parties and received the funds. Fournier had gradually taken the place of the 
mother I had lost, she had aided me in time of trouble, watched over my 
welfare, had written faithfully to me when I had been abroad in England, 
upon my return had as a friend opened her house to me when, in difficult circumstances, I desired to take asylum with her once again. Twen ty times 
over she had lent me money, and often had never asked for it back. The opportunity arrived to show my gratitude and to respond to her limitless faith in me, and you shall judge, Messieurs, with what eagerness my soul opened 
itself to virtue’s entr ance and what an easy access it had thereinto: Fournier 
fell ill, and her first thought was to call me to her bedside . 
“Duclos, my child, I love you,” said she, “well you know it, and I am going 
to prove it by the absolute trust I am about to place in you.  Despite your mind, 
which is not a good one, I believe you incapable of wronging a friend; I am 
very ill, I am old, I do not know what is to become of me. But I may die soon; I 
have relatives who will of course be my heirs. I can at least leave them 
someth ing, and want to: I have a hundred thousand francs in gold in this 
little coffer; take it, my child,” said she, “here, I give it to you, but upon 
condition you dispose of this money in keeping with my instructions.”  
“Oh, my dear mother,” said I, stretching  forth my arms to her, “I beseech 
you, these precautions distress me; they shall surely prove needless, but if unhappily they were to prove necessary, I take oath and swear exactly to carry 
out your intentions.”  
“I believe you, my child,” said she, “and th at is why my eyes have settled 
upon you; that little coffer, then, contains one hundred thousand francs in gold; I have scruples, a few scruples, my dear friend, I feel remorseful for the life I 
have led, the quantity of girls I have cast into crime and snatched away from 
God. And so I wish to do two things by means of which it is my hope the 
divinity will be led to deal less severely with me: I think of charity now, and of prayer. You shall take fifteen thousand francs of this money, and you shall 
give it to the Capuchins on the rue Saint -Honoré, so that those good fathers 
will say a perpetual mass for the salvation of my soul; another sum, also of fifteen thousand francs, shall be set aside, and when I have closed my eyes, you shall surrender it to the curé of the parish and beg him to distribute it amongst 
the poor dwelling in this quarter of the city. Charity is a very excellent thing, 
my child; nothing better repairs in the eyes of God the sins we have committed in this world. The poor are His children, and beloved of Him is he who gives 
them succor and comfort; never is God more to be pleased than by alms 
distributed to the needy. There lies the true way of gaining Heaven, my child! As for the remainder, immediately I am dead you shall take sixty thousan d 
francs to one Petignon, a shoemaker’s apprentice in the rue du Bouloir: this poor lad is my son, he knows nothing of his origins: he is the bastard issue of adultery. Upon dying, I want the unhappy orphan to benefit from those marks 
of tenderness I have never shown him while alive. Ten thousand francs are 
left; I beg you to keep them, my dear Duclos, keep them as a feeble token of my 
fondness for you, may they be some kind of recompense for the trouble you shall 
have to take in seeing to the distribution of the rest of my fortune. And may 
this little sum aid you to resolve to abandon the dreadful trade we follow, a 
calling wherein there is no salvation, nor any hope. For one is not a whore 
forever.”  
Innerly delighted to be entrusted with such a handsome su m, and 
thoroughly determined, for fear of becoming confused by Fournier’s intricate instructions upon sharing it, to keep her fortune intact and for myself alone, I 
produced a flood of very artificial tears and cast myself into the old matron’s 
arms, reite rated many oaths of fidelity, and turned all my thoughts thenceforth 
to devising means to prevent the cruel disappointments certain to occur were a 
return to sound health to bring about a change in her resolutions. The means presented itself the very next day: the doctor prescribed an emetic, and as I was 
in charge of nursing her, it was to me he handed the medicine, drawing my 
attention to the fact the package contained two doses, and warning me to be 
sure to administer only one at a time because, were bot h given her, death 
would be the result; were the first to have no effect, or an insufficient one, the 
second could be employed later, if need be. I promised the doctor to take the 
greatest possible care, and immediately he had turned his back, banishing fr om 
my heart all those futile sentiments which would have stopped a timorous 
spirit, putting to rout all remorse and all frailty, and thinking exclusively of 
my gold, of the sweet charm of making it mine, and of the delicious titillation one experiences eve ry time one concerts an evil deed, the certain prognostic of 
the pleasure it will give, dwelling, I say, upon all that and upon nothing else, I straightway dropped both doses into a glass of water and offered the brew to my dear friend’s lips; she swallowed it down without a moment’s delay and 
thereby, just as rapidly, found the death I had sought to procure her.  
I cannot describe to you what feelings possessed me when I saw my scheme 
had succeeded; each of the retchings wherewith she exhaled her life produ ced a 
truly delicious sensation throughout my entire being; thrilled, I listened to her, 
I watched her, I was perfectly intoxicated with joy. She stretched her arms 
toward me, addressed me a last farewell, I was overwhelmed with pleasurable 
sensations, I w as already forming a thousand plans for spending the gold. I 
had not long to wait; Fournier expired that same afternoon; the prize 
belonged to me . 
“Duclos,” said the Duc, “be truthful: did you frig yourself? did crime’s 
piercingly voluptuous sensation atta in your organs of pleasure?”  
“Yes, my Lord, I confess it did; thanks to my prank I discharged five 
times before nightfall.”  “It is then true,” the Duc intoned in a loud and authoritative voice, “it 
is then true that crime has of itself such a compelling at tractiveness that, 
unattended by any accessory activity, it may be itself suffice to inflame 
every passion and to hurl one into the same delirium occasioned by lubricious acts. Well, what say you?”  
“Why, my Lord,” Duclos answered, “I say I had my employer 
honorably buried, appropriated the bastard Petignon’s inheritance, wasted not a penny on perpetual masses, nor did I bother to make a 
single charitable distribution, for, as a matter of fact, I have always 
beheld charity with the most authentic horror, reg ardless of the 
speeches, such as Fournier’s, that I have heard pronounced in its favor. I 
maintain that there must be poor in this world, that Nature wishes that 
such there be, that she requires it, and that it is to fly in the face of her decrees to pretend to restore equilibrium, if it is disorder she wants.”  
“What’s this!” said Durcet. “Do you then have principles, Duclos? I 
am very pleased to observe this in you; for, as you appear to realize, any relief given to misfortune, any gesture that lightens th e load of the 
distressed, is a real crime against the natural order. The inequality she 
has created in our persons proves that this discordance pleases Nature, 
since ’twas  she established it, and since she wishes that it exist in 
fortunes as well as in bod ies. And as the weak may always redress 
matters by means of theft, the strong are equally allowed to restore 
inequality, or protect it, by refusing to give aid to the wretched. The 
universe would cease on the spot to subsist were there to be an exact 
simil arity amongst all beings; ’tis  of this disparity there is born the order 
which preserves, contains, directs everything. One must therefore take 
great care not to disturb it; moreover, in believing it is a good thing I do 
for this miserable class of men, I do much ill to another, for indigence is the nursery to which the wealthy and powerful repair in quest of the 
objects their lust or cruelty needs; I deprive the rich man of that branch 
of pleasure when, by raising up the downtrodden, I inhibit this class 
from yielding to him. And thus my charities have done nothing but put 
one part of humankind very modestly in my debt and done prodigious 
harm to the other. Hence, I regard charity not only as something evil in 
itself, but, what is more, I consider it a crim e against Nature who, having 
first made differences apparent to our eyes, has certainly never intended 
ideas of eliminating them to occupy our heads. And so, far from giving 
alms to the poor, consoling the widow, succoring the orphan, if it is according to Nature’s true intentions I wish to act, not only do I leave 
these wretches in the state Nature put them into, but I even lend Nature a strong right arm and aid her by prolonging this state and vigorously opposing any efforts they make to change it, and to this end I believe any 
means may be allowed.”  
“What!” cried the Duc, “even stealing from and ruining them?”  
“Oh my, yes,” the financier replied, “even augmenting their number, 
since this class serves another, and since, by increasing the size of the 
one, though I may do it a modicum of harm, I shall perform a great 
service for the other.”  
“That, my friends, is a very harsh system indeed,” said Curval. 
“Haven’t you heard tell of the sweet pleasures of doing good unto 
others?”  
“Abusive pleasures!” Durcet ans wered at once. “That delight you 
allude to is nothing like the one I recommend; the first is illusory, a 
fiction; the second is authentic, real; the first is founded upon vile 
prejudices, the second upon reason; the first, through the agency of 
pride, the most false of all our sensations, may provide the heart with a brief instant’s titillation; the other is a veritable mental pleasure -taking, 
and it inflames every other passion by the very fact it runs counter to 
common opinions. In a word, one of them get s this prick of mine stiff,” 
Durcet concluded, “and I feel practically nothing from the other.”  
“But must the one criterion for judging everything be our feelings?” 
asked the Bishop.  
“The only one, my friend,” said Durcet; “our senses, nothing else, 
must g uide all our actions in life, because only their voice is truly 
imperious.”  
“But God knows how many thousand crimes may be the result of such 
a doctrine,” the Bishop observed.  
“God knows, yes, and do you suppose that matters?” Durcet 
demanded; “for it is e njoyable, isn’t it? Crime is a natural mode, a 
manner whereby Nature stirs man, makes him to move. Why would you not have me let myself be moved by Nature in this direction as well as in 
the direction of virtue? Nature needs virtuous acts, and vicious ones  too; 
I serve Nature as well by performing the one as when I commit the 
other. But we have entered into a discussion which could lead us far; 
suppertime is approaching, and Duclos has still ground to cover before 
completing her task. Go on, charming girl, pursue your way, and believe 
me when I say you have just acknowledged an act and a doctrine which 
make you deserving of our eternal esteem and of that of every philosopher.”  
My first idea when once my good patron had been inhumed was to assume 
the directio n of her house and to maintain it on the same footing she had found 
so profitable. I announced this project to my colleagues, and they all, Eugénie 
above the rest, for she was my best beloved, they all, I say, promised to regard 
me as their new mother. I was not too young to pretend to the title, being then nearly thirty and possessed of all the intelligence and good sense one must have 
to govern a convent. And so it is, Messieurs, that I shall conclude the story of 
my adventures not as a public whore, but as an abbess, pretty enough and still 
youthful enough sometimes, indeed often, to treat directly with our clients; and treat with them I did: I shall in the sequel take care to notify you each time I 
took personal charge of the problem at hand. All Fournie r’s customers remained 
to me, I knew the secret of acquiring additional ones: my apartments were kept 
very neat and clean, and an excessive submissiveness inculcated in my girls, 
whom I selected with discrimination, hugely flattered my libertines’ caprices . 
The first purchaser to arrive was an old treasurer of the Exchequer, a 
former friend of the departed Fournier; I gave him little Lucile, over whom he 
waxed very enthusiastic. His habitual mania, quite as filthy as disagreeable 
for his partner, consisted in shitting upon his Dulcinea’s face, of smearing his excrement over all her features, and then of kissing her in this state, and of 
sucking her. Out of friendship for me, Lucile allowed the old satyr to have his 
way very completely with her, and he discha rged upon her belly as he lay 
kissing and licking his disgusting performance . 
Not long afterward, we had another; Eugénie was also assigned to cope 
with him. He had a barrel full of shit trundled in, plunged the naked girl into 
it, and licked every inch of  her body, swallowing what he removed, and not 
finishing until he had rendered her as clean as she had been prior to her immersion. That one was a celebrated lawyer, a rich man and a very well -
known one; he possessed, for the enjoyment of women, none but the most 
modest qualities, which lack he remedied by this species of libertinage he had 
lovingly cultivated all his life . 
The Marquis de R ***, one of Fournier’s oldest clients, came shortly after her 
death to express his sorrow upon learning that she was no  more; he also assured 
me he would patronize the house just as faithfully as before and, to convince me of his devotion, wanted to see Eugénie that same evening. This old rake’s 
passion consisted in first bestowing prodigious kisses upon the girl’s mouth; he 
swallowed all the saliva it were possible to drain from her, then kissed her buttocks for a quarter of an hour, called for farts, and finally demanded the major thing. After it had been done, he kept the turd in his mouth and, 
making the girl bend down over him, he had her embrace him with one hand 
and frig him with the other; and while he was tasting the pleasure of this masturbation and tickling her beshitted asshole, the girl had to eat the turd she 
had deposited in his mouth. Although he was prepared  to pay very well, he 
used to find exceedingly few girls who were willing to cooperate in this little 
abomination, and that is why the Marquis would come regularly to me: he 
was as eager to remain one of my clients as I was to have him make frequent 
visits to my establishment… . 
At this point the Duc, very hot indeed, said that as the supper hour 
was hard upon them, he would like, before going to table, to execute the last-cited fantasy. And this is how he went about it: he had Sophie come 
to him, received h er turd in his mouth, then obliged Zélamir to run up 
and eat Sophie’s creation. This idiosyncrasy might perhaps have been a 
delight for anyone else but a child like Zélamir; as yet insufficiently mature, hence unable to appreciate the delicious, he manifes ted disgust 
only, and seemed about to misbehave. But the Duc threatened him with everything his anger might produce were the boy to hesitate another instant; the boy obeyed. The stunt struck the others as so engaging that 
each of them imitated it, more or less, for Durcet held that favors had to 
be parceled out fairly; was it just, he asked, for the little boys to eat the 
girls’ shit while the girls went hungry? no, surely not, and consequently 
he had Zéphyr shit in his mouth and ordered up Augustine to eat  the marmalade, which that lovely and interesting girl promptly did, her 
repast being as promptly succeeded by racking vomitings.  
Curval imitated this variation and received his dear Adonis’ turd, 
which Michette consumed, not without a duplication of Augus tine’s 
histrionics; as for the Bishop, he was content to emulate his brother, and 
had the delicate Zelmire excrete a confiture Céladon was induced to 
gobble up. Accompanying all this were certain unmistakable signs of repugnance which, of course, were of t he greatest interest to libertines in 
whose view the torments they inflict are unexcelled for inspiring satisfaction. The Bishop and the Duc discharged, the two others either could not, or would not, and all four went in to supper, where Duclos’ 
action was  the object of the loftiest encomiums.  
“A very intelligent creature,” observed the Duc, whose regard for the 
storyteller could not have been more profound. “Intelligent, I say, to 
have sensed that gratitude is nonsense, an hallucination, and that ties of 
fondness or of any other sort ought never either to make us pause or 
even to suspend the effects of crime, because the object which has served 
us can claim no right to our heart’s generosity; that object employs itself 
only in our behalf, its mere presence humiliates a stout soul, and one 
must either hate or be rid of it.”  
“Very true,” said Durcet, “so true that you’ll never see a man of any wit 
seek to make others grateful to him. Fully certain that benevolence 
creates nothing but enemies, he practices only  the arts his wisdom 
approves for his safety.”  
“One moment,” interrupted the Bishop. “It is not at giving you 
pleasure he who serves you is laboring, but he is rather striving simply to 
gain an ascendancy over you by putting you in his debt. Well, I ask, what 
does such a scheme deserve? He does not say, as he serves you: I serve you because I wish to do good for you. No, he simply says: I put you 
under obligation in order to lower you and to raise myself above you.”  
“These reflections seem to me,” said Durc et, “abundantly to prove 
how abusive are the services usually rendered, and how absurd is the practice of good. But, they will tell you, one does good for its own sake 
and for one’s own; ’tis  all very well for them whose weakness of spirit 
permits them to enjoy such little delights, but they who are revolted by 
them, as are we, great God ! would be great fools to bother over such 
tepid stuff.”  
This doctrine having fired their imaginations, Messieurs drank a 
great deal, and the orgies were celebrated with viv acity and brio . Our 
like-thinking libertines sent the children to bed, chose to spend a part 
of the night tippling with no one but the four elders and the four storytellers, and in their company to vie with one another in infamies 
and atrocities. As amongs t these twelve individuals there was not one 
who was not worthy of the noose, the rack, and probably the wheel, I 
leave it to the reader to picture what was said and done. For from 
words they passed to deeds, the Duc got hot again, and I don’t know 
just wh y it happened or how, but they say Thérèse bore the marks of 
his affection for weeks. However all that may be, let us allow our actors 
to move from these bacchanals to the chaste bed of the wife that had 
been prepared for each of the four, and let us see w hat transpired at the 
castle on the morrow.    
THE SIXTEENTH DAY  
Our heroes rose as bright and fresh as if they had just arrived from 
confession; but upon close inspection, one might have noticed that the Duc was beginning to tire a little. Blame for this could have been 
bestowed upon Duclos; there is no question but that the girl had entirely 
mastered the art of procuring him delight and that, according to his own 
words, his discharges were lubricious with no one else, which would 
corroborate the idea that  these matters depend solely upon caprice, upon 
idiosyncrasy, and that age, looks, virtue, and all the rest have nothing 
whatever to do with the problem, that it all boils down to a certain 
tactfulness which is much more often found possessed by beauties in the 
autumn of life than by those others of no experience whom the 
springtide yet crowns with all her show.  
There was as well another creature in the company who was 
beginning to make herself very amiable and to attract considerable attention; we are refe rring to Julie. She was already announcing signs of 
imagination, debauchery, and of libertinage. Astute enough to sense that she stood in need of protection, clever enough to caress those very 
persons for whom perhaps she did not at heart have a very great  
fondness, she contrived to become Duclos’ friend, this in order to try to 
achieve some favor in the eyes of her father who, she was well aware, 
could, if he chose, exert a great influence upon the others. Every time 
her turn came to lie with the Duc, she would adopt Duclos’ techniques 
and emulate them so successfully, give proof of such skill, so much 
consideration, that the Duc was always sure of obtaining delicious 
discharges whenever he used those two creatures to procure them. Nevertheless, his enthusi asm for his daughter was waning prodigiously, 
and perhaps without Duclos’ assistance, for the narrator consistently 
spoke well in her behalf, she would never have been able to occupy a 
place in his good graces. Her husband, Curval, was roughly of the same mind regarding her, and although, by means of her impure mouth and 
kisses, she still managed to wheedle a few discharges from him, disgust 
was dangerously near to becoming his predominating attitude toward her: one might even have said that the fires of hi s hostility were fanned 
by her impudicious caresses. Durcet held her in no esteem, she had not made him discharge more than twice since the adventures at Silling had started. And so it seemed that no one but the Bishop remained to her, 
and he indeed was fond of her libertine jargon, and judged hers to be the 
world’s finest ass; and it is certain that Nature had furnished her with one as lovely as that which had been given to Venus. She hence made 
the most of that part, for she wished absolutely to please at  whatever the 
price; as she felt an extreme need for a protector, she sought to cultivate 
Duclos.  
At the chapel appeared that day no more than three persons: Hébé, 
Constance, Martaine; no one had been found at fault that morning. 
After the three subjects h ad ridded themselves of their freight, Durcet 
was taken by an impulse to be delivered of his. The Duc, who since early morning had been fluttering and buzzing about the financier’s behind, seized the opportunity to satisfy himself and, sending away everyone but 
Constance, whom they kept as an aide, they encloseted themselves in the 
chapel. The Duc was appeased by the generous mouthful of shit he had 
from Durcet; these gentlemen, however, did not limit themselves to that 
prelude, and afterward Constance reported to the Bishop that they had 
performed infamies for a good thirty minutes. But what is one to expect? they had been friends, as I have said, since childhood, and since then had 
never ceased reminding one another of their schoolboy pleasures. As for 
Constance, she served no great purpose during this tête- à-tête; she 
wiped asses, sucked and frigged a few pricks, and that was about all.  
They retired to the salon, the four friends conversed there for a while, 
and the midday meal was announced. It was, as us ual, splendid and 
libertine and, after some lewd fingerings and bawdy colling, and a few 
scandalous remarks which spiced their lascivious byplay, they returned to 
the salon where Zéphyr and Hyacinthe, Michette and Colombe were 
waiting to serve coffee. The Duc thigh- fucked Michette, and Curval, 
Hyacinthe; Durcet fetched shit out of Colombe, and the Bishop 
dropped some in Zéphyr’s mouth; Curval, recollecting one of the 
passions Duclos had related the day before, was moved to shit in Colombe’s cunt; old Thérès e, who was supervising the day’s quartet, 
placed Colombe in a suitable posture, and Curval performed. But as he produced colossal turds, proportioned by the immense quantity of victuals wherewith he stuffed himself every day, almost all of his creation 
spilled upon the floor and it was, so to speak, only superficially he 
beshitified that pretty little virgin cunt which had not, one would have 
thought, been intended by Nature to be used for such disagreeable pleasures.  
Deliciously frigged by Zéphyr, the Bish op yielded his fuck 
philosophically, joining, to the delights he was feeling, that other offered by the wonderful spectacle being enacted about him. He was furious, he 
scolded Zéphyr, he scolded Curval, he fumed and grumbled at everyone. 
He was given a lar ge glass of elixir whereby they hoped his faculties 
would be restored, Michette and Colombe settled him upon a sofa for 
his nap and stood by him while he slept. He woke amply refreshed and, in order to give him additional strength, Colombe sucked him for a  
moment or two; his engine responded by showing some positive signs of 
life, and they went next into the auditorium. The Bishop had Julie on his 
couch; as he was rather fond of her, the sight of her improved his mood. The Duc had Aline; Durcet, Constance; the Président, his daughter. 
Everything being ready, the lovely Duclos installed herself upon her throne and began thus:  
There is nothing more untrue than to say money acquired through crime 
brings no happiness. No greater error, I assure you; my house pro spered; never 
had so many clients come there during Fournier’s administration. It was then 
an idea occurred to me, a rather cruel idea, I admit, but one which, I dare 
flatter myself in believing, will not be altogether displeasing to your Lordships. 
It see med to me that when one had not done unto another the good  one ought 
to have done him, there existed a certain wicked voluptuousness in doing him 
ill, and my perfidious imagination suggested a little libertine mischief at the 
expense of that same Petignon,  my benefactress’ son, and the individual to 
whom I had been charged to surrender a fortune which, doubtless, would have 
proven very welcome to that wretch, and which I had already begun to 
squander upon trifles. The occasion arrived in this way: the poor shoemaker, 
married to a girl of his own class and sort, had, as the unique fruit of this 
unfortunate marriage, a daughter of about twelve; I had been told that, 
together with all the lovely features of childhood, she possessed all the attributes of the mos t tender beauty. This child, then being brought up humbly but 
nevertheless as carefully as the parents’ indigence could permit, for she was the 
joy and light of their life, this child, I say, struck me as a capture well worth 
making.  
Petignon had never com e to the house, he knew nothing of the legal rights 
that were his; immediately after Fournier had mentioned him to me, my first move was to obtain information about him and those around him, and thus I 
learned that he possessed a treasure in his house. At about the same time the 
Comte de Mesanges came to me; a famous libertine of whose profession 
Desgranges will doubtless have at least one occasion to speak, the Comte requested me to provide him with a maid of no more than thirteen at 
whatever the price. I don’t know what he wanted with the article, for he 
passed for a man with very rigorous scruples when it was a question of women, but his proposal was simple enough: after having, with the help of 
experts, established her virginity, he said he would buy her  from me for a fixed 
sum and, from this moment on, she would be his, he would be her master, and, 
he added, the child would be removed, perhaps permanently, from France.  
As the Comte was one of my habitués —you shall see him enter upon the 
scene very soon —I set everything in motion in an effort to satisfy him; 
Petignon’s little daughter seemed to me exactly what he needed. But how was I 
to get my hands upon her? The child never left the house, it was there she 
received her education; so carefully was she sup ervised, so circumspectly that I 
began to despair of the prize. Nor was I able to employ that masterful  
debaucher of girls I mentioned some time ago; he was away from the city, and 
the Comte was urging me to hurry. And so I could find only one means, and 
this means could not have been better designed to serve the secret little 
wickedness which was impelling me to commit this crime, for the crime was 
aggravated by it. I resolved to embroil husband and wife in some kind of difficulty, to strive to get both of  them imprisoned, and in this way removing 
some of the obstacles between the child and myself, I fancied I would encounter no trouble in luring her into the snare. Wherewith I consulted one of my 
friends, a skilled barrister whom I trusted and who was capable of anything; I 
put him on the scent, he went directly to work: he compiled information, made 
inquiries, located creditors, aroused them, supported their claims, in brief, it took less than a week to lodge husband and wife behind bars. From then on 
everything was easy; an adroit scout accosted the little girl, who had been 
abandoned to the care of some poor neighbors, she was led to me. Her appearance perfectly matched the reports I had received: she had a sweet, a soft, a fair skin, the roundest little ornaments, charms perfectly shaped …. In a 
word, it were difficult to find a prettier child . 
As she cost me, all told, about twenty  louis, and as the Comte wished to pay 
a flat price for her and, having once bought her outright, wished neither to 
hear anoth er word about the transaction nor have further dealings with 
anyone, I let her go for one hundred  louis; it being essential to my interests 
that no one get wind of my part in the thing, I was content with a net profit 
of sixty  louis, giving my attorney ano ther twenty to create just that kind of 
stir which would prevent her parents from having news of their daughter for a 
long time. But news did reach them; the girl’s disappearance was impossible to 
conceal. The neighbors who had been guilty of negligence ex cused themselves as 
best they were able, and as for the poor shoemaker and his wife, my man -of-
law managed matters so well that they were never able to remedy the accident, for both of them died in jail some eleven years after I had made off with my 
prey. I reaped a twofold advantage from that little mishap, since it 
simultaneously assured me undisputed ownership of the child I was 
negotiating to sell and also assured me 60,000 francs for my trouble. As for the 
child, the Comte was satisfied  with her; never  did he encounter any 
difficulties, never did I, no, not a word was said, and it is more than likely 
Madame Desgranges will finish her story; I know no more about it. But it is 
high time to return to my own adventures, and to the daily events which may 
offer you the voluptuous details we have listed . 
“Oh by God!” Curval broke in, “I adore your prudence —there is 
something in your method which bespeaks a meditated villainy, an orderliness which pleases me more than I can say. And as for that 
rascality of havi ng given the final stroke to a victim you had until then 
only scratched…ah, that seems to me a refinement of infamy which deserves a place amongst our own masterpieces.”  
“I wonder, however,” said Durcet, “whether I might not have done 
worse, for, after all , those parents could have obtained their release from 
jail: there are God knows how many fools in the world who think of nothing but helping such people. Those eleven years during which they 
lingered on meant worry for you.”  
“Monsieur,” Duclos answered him, “when one does not enjoy the 
influence you have in society, when for one’s little pranks one is forced to 
employ second -rate allies, caution often becomes very necessary, and at 
such times one dares not do all one would like.”  
“True, true,” said the Duc , “she was unable to go any further.”  
And the amiable creature took up the thread of her narrative.  
Dreadful it is, my Lords , said that accomplished girl, to have still to 
relate turpitudes in kind like to those I have been speaking about for several 
days;  but you have required that I cite everything which might bear an even 
faint resemblance to this great genre of abomination, and insisted too that I 
suppress nothing. But three more examples of these filthy atrocities and we 
shall then continue on to other  fantasies . 
The first I propose to mention is that of an elderly administrator of the 
demesne, a man of I should say three score and six. He would have the woman remove all her clothes and, after having fondled her buttocks with less delicacy 
than brutality, he would promptly order her to shit on the floor before his eyes, 
in the middle of the room. When he had relished this prospect, he would  in his 
turn step up and lay his own turd next to hers, then, combining them with his hands, he would oblige the gir l to get down on all fours and eat the hash, and while eating she was to present her behind, which she was to have brought to 
the party in a most maculated state. While the ceremony was in progress he 
would manualize himself, and used to discharge as soon as the last bite had 
vanished. There were few girls, as your Lordships may readily believe, who would consent to submit themselves to such vile use, but all the same the 
administrator had to have them youthful and healthy …. Well, I used 
somehow to find wha t he needed, for everything is to be found in Paris; 
however, the merchandise came dear . 
The second example of the three I have left to cite of this species also required 
what might be termed a furious docility on the girl’s part; but as this libertine 
wished her to be extremely young, I had less trouble supplying him: children 
lend themselves to these games more readily than do mature women. I located a pretty little shopgirl of twelve or thirteen for the gentleman whom we are about to see in action; he ar rives, has the girl take off only the clothing that 
covers her from the waist down; he toys with her behind for a brief moment, gets her to fart a little, then gives himself four or five copious enemas which, subsequently, he obliges his little partner to receive into her mouth and to 
swallow as the cascade tumbles out of his rectum. Meanwhile, as he was seated 
astride her chest, he employed one hand to frig a rather thick device and with 
the other he kneaded and pinched her mons veneris and, in order that he might 
do it all as he wished, he had to have a completely hairless cunt to work with. 
This individual wanted to continue on even after his sixth explosion, for his discharge was not yet achieved. The little girl, convulsed with vomiting, 
managed to arti culate her disinclination to proceed, she begged to be spared, he 
laughed at her, introduced a seventh draught, expelled it, and his fuck finally 
did indeed flow . 
An elderly banker provides us with the last example of these unclean 
horrors —or rather the la st example of a man for whom they were the principal element, for I must warn you that we shall have repeated occasion to behold 
them as accessories to the main endeavor. He had to have a handsome woman, 
but one aged from  forty to forty -five and with an ex tremely flabby pair of 
breasts. Immediately they were encloseted together he would have her remove 
all she was wearing from the waist up, and having brutally handled her teats, 
would cry: “These damned cow dugs! what good are such tripes, eh? What are 
they for if not to wipe my ass upon?” Next he would squeeze them, twist them, 
wring them, twine them together, tug them, pound them, spit upon them, kick 
and trample them, all the while saying, what a damned infamous thing is a 
flabby tit, he could not imagine  what Nature had intended these bags of skin 
for, why had Nature spoiled and dishonored woman’s body with these things? 
etc. After all these preposterous remarks he would remove every stitch of his 
clothing. My God, what a body! how am I to describe it to your Lordships! 
’Twas  no more than a disgusting ulcer, a running sore, pus seemed to cover 
him from head to toe, I could smell his infected odor even in the adjacent room from which I was observing the ritual; such was the relic which, however, the woman h ad to suck . 
“Suck?” said the Duc.  
Yes, Messieurs, Duclos affirmed, suck from top to bottom, every square 
inch of his body had to be sucked, the tongue was to neglect nothing, to explore 
it all; I had forewarned the girl, but apparently in vain. She’d not e xpected 
this; for upon catching sight of that ambulatory corpse she shrank away in 
horror . 
“What’s this, bitch?” says he, “do I disgust you? Why, that’s a pity, for you’re 
going to have to suck me, your tongue is going to have to lick every part of my body. Come now! Stop playing the shy little girl; others have done the job, see 
to it that you do it as well as they. That’s enough, I tell you, no nonsense.”  Ah, they speak true when they say that with money one can accomplish 
anything; the poor creature I ha d given him was in the extremest misery, and 
here was a chance to earn two  louis: she did everything she was told, and the 
podagrous old scoundrel, thrilled by the sensation of a tongue straying softly 
over his hideous body and sweetening the bitter pungen cy devouring him, 
frigged himself voluptuously during the entire operation. When it had been completed, and completed, as you may well suppose, despite the horrible revulsion of the luckless woman, when it was done, I say, he had her lie down 
upon the floo r on her back, he got astride her, shitted all over her bubs, and 
squeezing his performance between them, he used them, first one, then the 
other, to wipe his ass. But with what regards his discharge, I saw not so much 
as a hint, and some time later I lear ned that it required several such operations 
before he could be induced to part with his liquor; and as he was a man who 
seldom twice visited the same place, I saw no more of him and, to tell the 
truth, was by no means sorry . 
“Upon my soul,” the Duc observ ed, “I find the conclusion of that 
man’s operation very reasonable indeed, and I too have never been able to believe that teats were intended for anything but bum -wipes.”  
“One may be certain,” said Curval, who at the moment was rather 
brutally handling tho se belonging to the sweet and tender Aline, “one 
may be certain indeed that a tit is a very infamous object. I never catch 
sight of one without being plunged straightway into a rage. Upon seeing 
these things I experience a certain disgust, a certain repugnance assails 
me…only a cunt has a worse and more decided effect upon me.”  
And so saying, he flung himself into his closet, dragging Aline by the 
breast and calling out to Sophie and Zelmire, his quatrain’s two girls, and Fanchon to follow him. One cannot b e sure of precisely what he 
did, but a loud scream, clearly a woman’s, was heard by the others in the auditorium, and shortly afterward came the bellowings that usually 
indicated the Président had discharged. He returned, Aline was weeping 
and held a kerch ief over her breast, and as these events rarely created any 
stir, or, at best, a few chuckles, Duclos went on with her story at once.  
Several days later I myself took care, said she, of an old monk whose 
mania, more wearying to the hand, was rather less re volting to the stomach. 
He presented me with a great ugly behind covered with skin as tough as bull’s 
hide and as wrinkled as a dried leaf; the task here was to knead his ass, to 
handle it, drub and thump it, squeeze it with all my strength, but when I 
reached the hole, nothing I did seemed sufficiently violent: I had to catch up the 
skin, rub  it, pinch it, roll it between my fingers, use my nails, and it was 
thanks only to the vigor of my ministrations his fuck finally emerged. He attended to his own frigg ing while I abused his bum and vent, and I was not 
even obliged to show him my ankles. But that man must have made a very 
fierce and old habit of those manipulations, for his behind, although slack and 
hanging, was nevertheless upholstered by a skin as hor ny and as thick as 
leather . 
The next day, doubtless having spoken highly of me and my dexterity to his 
friends in the monastery, he sent one of his brethren upon whose ass one had to bestow slaps, indeed blows of the hand, and stout ones at that; but this new 
ecclesiastic, more of a libertine and an examiner, preceded his rite by a 
meticulous inspection of his woman’s buttocks, and my ass was kissed, nuzzled, tongued ten or twelve times over, the intervals being filled by blows aimed at 
his. When his hide had taken a scarlet hue, his prick got bravely up, and I can 
certify that it was one of the noblest engines I had palmed and fingered until 
that day. He put it into my hand, recommending that I frig it while 
continuing to slap him with the other . “Unless I am gravely mistaken,” said the Bishop, “we have finally 
reached the article of passive fustigation.”  
“Yes, Monseigneur,” replied Duclos, “we have, and as my task for 
today has been fulfilled, you will consent to allow me to postpone until 
tomorrow the beginning of fustigatory tastes; we shall devote several 
soirees to dealing with them.”  
As nearly half an hour remained before supper, Durcet said that, to 
stimulate his appetite, he wished to give his entrails a few rinses; his 
announcement made something of an impression upon the women, 
who began to tremble; but sentence had been decreed, there was no revoking it. Thérèse, his servant that day, assured him she introduced 
the tube with wonderful skill; from the assertion she passed to the 
proof, and as soon as  the little financier felt his bowels loaded, he 
singled out Rosette, beckoned her to him, and bade her open her 
mouth. There was some balking, a few complaints and a word or two 
of pleading, but the capital thing was obedience and, sure enough, the poor l ittle girl swallowed two eruptions, having been granted the option 
of regurgitating them afterward. And regurgitate them she did, and 
soon. Happily, the supper bell sounded, for the financier was getting 
ready to begin again. But the prospect of a meal changed the 
disposition of their Lordships’ minds, they went to taste different 
pleasures. A few turds were lodged on a few bubs at the orgies, and a great deal of shit was gleaned from asses; within the assembly’s full 
view, the Duc consumed Duclos’ turd, wh ile that splendid girl sucked 
him, and while the bawdy fellow’s hands roamed here and there, his 
fuck came out in a thick spray; Curval having imitated him with 
Champville, the friends began to speak of retiring for the night.    
THE SEVENTEENTH DAY  
The te rrible antipathy the Président had for Constance was manifest in 
daily outbursts: he had spent the night with her, having made a bilateral 
arrangement with Durcet, to whom he returned her the following 
morning with the most bitter complaints about her beha vior. 
“Since because of her condition,” said he, “the society seems loath to 
expose her to the customary punishments for fear she be brought to bed before the time we have appointed to pluck her fruit, at least, by Jesus,” 
said he, “we should find some mea ns or other to punish the whore when 
she chooses to play the fool.”  
Ah, but what is that spirit of evil that inhabits libertines? Some 
glimmer of it may be obtained by analyzing Constance’s prodigious fault. O reader, what do you suppose it was had waked C urval’s wrath? Even 
worse than you may have dreamt: she had most unfortunately turned her front toward her master when he had called for her behind, ah yes, and such sins are not to be forgiven. But the worst part of her error was her 
denial of the fact; s he declared, and there seemed some basis to her 
contention, that the Président was calumniating her, that he was seeking 
naught but her downfall, that she never lay with him but he would 
invent some such untruth; but as the law was precise and formal on th is 
point, and as women’s speeches were given no credence whatever in that 
society, but one question remained posed: how in future was this female 
to be chastised without risking the spoilage of the fruit ripening in her? 
It was decided that for each misdem eanor she would be obliged to eat a 
turd and, consequently, Curval insisted that she begin there and then. 
Approbation greeted his demand. They were at the time breakfasting in the girls’ quarters, word was dispatched, Constance was summoned, the 
Président  shitted in the center of the room, and she was enjoined to 
approach his creation on hands and knees and to devour what the cruel man had just wrought. She cast herself upon her knees, yes, but in this posture begged pardon, and her solicitations went unhe eded; Nature had 
put bronze in those breasts where hearts are commonly to be found. Nothing more entertaining than the grimaces and affected airs to which the poor woman resorted before capitulating, and God knows how 
amused Messieurs were by the scene. At  last, however, decisive action 
had to be taken, Constance’s very soul seemed to burst before she was 
half done, but it had all to be done nevertheless, and every ounce 
disappeared from the tiles on the floor.  
Excited by what he was witnessing, each of our  friends, while 
watching, had himself frigged by a small girl; Curval, singularly aroused 
by the operation and benefiting from the wondrous skill of Augustine’s 
enchanted fingers, feeling himself nigh to overflowing, called to Constance, who had scarcely f inished eating her mournful breakfast.  
“Hither, come to me, whore,” said he, “after having bolted some fish 
one needs a little sauce, good white sauce. Come get a mouthful.”  
Well, there was no escaping that ordeal either, and Curval, who, while 
operating, was having Augustine shit, opened the sluices and let fly into 
the mouth of the Duc’s miserable wife, and at the same time swallowed the fresh and delicate little turd the interesting Augustine had hatched 
for him.  
The inspection tours were conducted, Durc et found shit in Sophie’s 
chamber pot. The young lady sought to excuse her error by maintaining that she had been suffering from indigestion.  “Not at all,” Durcet observed as expertly he handled the turd, “that is 
not true: indigestion produces diarrhea, s oup, my dear, and this article 
looks very sound to me.”  
And straightway taking up his baneful notebook, he wrote down the 
name of that charming creature, who did her best to hide her tears and 
refrained, at Durcet’s request, from deploring her situation. E veryone 
else had abided by the regulations, but in the boys’ chamber, Zélamir, 
who had shitted the previous evening during the orgies and who had 
been told not to wipe his little bum, had tidied it up none the less, 
disobeying orders. These were crimes of the first magnitude: Zélamir’s name was inscribed. Notwithstanding the boy’s delinquency, Durcet 
kissed his ass and had himself sucked for a brief moment, then 
Messieurs passed on to the chapel, where they beheld the shitting of two subaltern fuckers, Alin e, Fanny, Thérèse, and Champville. The Duc 
received Fanny’s performance in his mouth, and he ate it, the Bishop’s mouth caught the two fuckers’ turds, one of which the prelate devoured, Durcet made Champville’s his own, and the Président, despite his 
disch arge, gulped down Aline’s with all the avidity he had exhibited 
while consuming what Augustine had done for him.  
Constance’s scene had heated the company’s imagination, for it had 
been a long time since Messieurs had indulged themselves in such 
extravaganc es so early in the morning. Dinner conversation dealt with 
moral science. The Duc declared he could not understand why in France 
the law smote so heavily against libertinage, since libertinage, by keeping 
the citizens busy, kept them clear of cabals and plots and revolutions; the 
Bishop observed that, no, the laws did not exactly aim at the suppression 
of libertinage, but at its excesses. Whereupon the latter were analyzed, 
and the Duc proved that there was nothing dangerous in excess, no excess which could  justly arouse the government’s suspicion, and that, 
these facts being clear, the official attitude was not only cruel but absurd; 
what other word was there to describe bringing artillery to bear upon 
mosquitoes?  
From remarks they progressed to effects, th e Duc, half -drunk, 
abandoned himself in Zéphyr’s arms, and for thirty long minutes sucked that lovely child’s mouth while Hercule, exploiting the situation, buried his enormous engine in the Duc’s anus. Blangis was all complacency, and 
without stirring, without the flicker of an eyelash, went on with his 
kissing as, virtually without noticing it, he changed sex. His companions all gave themselves over to other infamies, and then they sallied forth to 
coffee. As they had just played a multitude of silly litt le pranks, the 
atmosphere was calm, and this was perhaps the one coffee hour during 
the entire four months’ outing when no fuck was shed. Duclos was 
already upon the tribune, awaiting the company; when everyone had 
taken his place, she addressed her audito rs in this wise:  
I had recently suffered a loss in my house, and it had a deep effect upon me 
in every sense. Eugénie, whom I loved with a passion and who, thanks to her 
most extraordinary complaisance in whatever was connected with the possibility of earn ing me money, had been especially useful to me, Eugénie, I 
say, had just been spirited away. It happened in the strangest fashion: a domestic, having first paid the price settled upon, came to conduct her, so he said, to a supper that was to be held outsid e the city; her participation in the 
affair would be worth seven or eight  louis. I was not at the house at the time 
the transaction took place, for I should never have allowed her to leave with someone I didn’t know, but the domestic applied directly to he r and she agreed 
to go…. I have never seen her since . “Nor shall you ever again,” said Desgranges. “The party proposed was 
her last one, and it will be my agreeable task to add the denouement to 
that lovely girl’s history.”  
“Great God!” cried Duclos. “She was so beautiful, that girl …only 
twenty, her face was so sweet, she was so delicate ….” 
“And, one might add, her body was the most superb in Paris,” 
Desgranges said. “All those charms conspired to her undoing, but go on 
with what you were saying, let’s not become mired down in 
circumstances.”  
Lucile was the girl who took her place , Duclos continued, both in my 
heart and in my bed, but not in the household’s activities, for she had not by any means Eugénie’s submissive temper nor her great understanding . 
All the same, it was to her hands I entrusted, not long afterward, that 
certain Benedictine prior who used to pay me a visit now and again, and who had in past times been wont to frolic with Eugénie. After the good father had 
warmed her cunt with his tongue an d thoroughly sucked her mouth, the major 
phase of the process began: Lucile took the whip and plied it lightly over his 
prick and balls, and he discharged from a limp machine; the gentle  rubbing, 
the mere application of the lash produced his orgasm. His greatest pleasure used 
to consist in watching the girl slash with her whip at the drops of fuck as they 
spattered from his prick . 
The next day, I myself took charge of a gentleman upon whose bare behind 
one had to lay one hundred carefully counted whip strok es; before his beating 
he prepared himself by kissing one’s behind and while being lashed he frigged 
himself . 
A third, with whom I had dealings some time later, had even heavier 
demands to satisfy; he also gilded each detail with additional ceremony: I 
received notice of his intended arrival a week in advance, and during that time I had to avoid washing any part of my body, and above all was to spare 
my cunt, my ass, my mouth; and furthermore, as soon as I learned he was to 
come, I selected three cat -o’-nine-tails and immersed them in a pot full of 
mixed urine and shit, and kept the whips soaking there until he presented 
himself. He was an elderly collector of the salt tax, a man of considerable 
means, a widower, without children, and he treated himself to s uch parties all 
the time. The first thing that interested him was to determine whether I had 
scrupulously abstained from ablutions, as he had enjoined me; I assured him I 
had followed his instructions to the letter; he wished proof, and began by 
applying a  kiss to my lips. This experience must have convinced him, for he 
then suggested we go up to the room, and I realized that had he, upon kissing 
me, discovered I had cleansed my mouth in any way at all, he would not have 
wished to continue with the party. W e go up together, as I say, he regards the 
whips steeping in the pot, then, bidding me undress, he sets to sniffing every 
part of my body, above all the orifices he had expressly forbidden me to wash; 
as I had honored his prescription in perfect faith and in every article, he doubtless discovered the aroma he desired to be there, for I saw him grow 
restless, appear anxious to be off, and heard him exclaim: “Ah, by fuck, that’s 
what I want, that’s just what I want!” I proceeded to fondle his ass: it was 
sheathed in what positively resembled boiled leather in color, texture, and 
toughness. After having spent a minute caressing, handling, poking about 
those gnarled, storm -beaten hindquarters, I seized a cat -o’-nine-tails and, 
without drying it, I gave him ten s tinging cuts, putting all my strength into 
the blows; but this beginning produced not a tremor , he not only remained 
impassive, but my blows put not so much as the faintest scratch upon that 
unshakable citadel. Having opened with this prologue, I sank thre e of my 
fingers into his anus, took firm hold, and began to rattle him with might and 
main, but our man was insensible to the same degree here as elsewhere; my struggles failed to be acknowledged by so much as a sigh. These two initial 
ceremonies completed , his turn came to act; I lay belly down upon the bed, he 
knelt, spread my buttocks, and alternately shot his pilgrim tongue into this hole and into the other, and they, one may be sure, were, in keeping with his instructions, not entirely unaromatic. Afte r he had done considerable sucking, I 
took up another whip, laid on a second time and socratized him again, he knelt as before and returned to his licking, and so it went, each of us doing his part at least fifteen times over. Finally, giving me further in structions and 
bidding me guide my movements in consonance with the state of his prick, which I was to observe carefully but which I was not to touch, when next he knelt I unleashed my turd. It shot squarely into his face, he fell back, exclaimed 
that I was an insolent creature, and discharged while frigging himself and 
while uttering cries that might have been heard in the street had I not taken the precaution of drawing the shutters. But the turd fell to the floor, he did 
naught but stare at and smell it,  neither putting it in his mouth nor even 
touching it; he had received at least two hundred lashes, and I may assure 
you…his body bore not a trace of what it had sustained, his horny ass, fortified 
by years of rude usage, betrayed not the least mark . 
“Well , by God’s bum button!” chortled the Duc, “there’s an ass, 
Président, worth as much as the curiosity you drag about.”  
“Oh yes, yes,” said Curval, a stammer in his voice, for Aline was 
frigging him, “yes indeed, that fellow seems to have both my buttocks and my tastes, for, you know, I am infinitely opposed to the use of the 
bidet, but I prefer a longer abstinence: I usually set the period at a 
minimum of three months.”  
“Président, your prick’s stiff,” the Duc said.  
“Do you think so?” Curval replied. “Faith,  you’d best consult Aline 
here, she’ll be able to tell you what’s what, as for myself, you know, I’m so accustomed to that particular state of affairs that I rarely notice when 
it ends or when it begins. There is only one thing I can tell you with 
complete  confidence, and that is that at this very moment I’d hugely like 
to have my hands upon a very impure whore; I’d like her to present me 
with a bucketful of shit, fill a bowl to above the rim, I’d like her ass to 
stink from shit, I’d like her cunt to smell like a beach covered with dead 
fish. But hold! Thérèse, O thou whose filth is as old as the hills, thou who since baptism hast not wiped thine ass, and whose infamous cunt 
breeds a pestilence three leagues on every side, come bring all that to my 
nose’s de lectation, I beg thee, and to that put a fine wet turd, if ’twould  
please thee.”  
Thérèse approaches, with foul and evil charms, with parts disgusting 
and withered and wounded she rubs the magistrate’s face, upon his nose she excretes the desired turd, Alin e does frig amain, the libertine 
discharges, and Duclos therewith resumes the story she has to tell.  
An elderly rascal, who used to receive a new girl every day for the operation 
I am going to describe, besought one of my friends to persuade me to visit hi m, 
and at the same time I was given information about the ceremony regularly 
performed at the lecher’s home. I arrive, he examines me with a phlegmatic glance, the kind of glance one encounters among habitual libertines, and which 
in an instant arrives at an infallible estimate of the object under scrutiny . 
“I have been told you have a fine ass,” said he in a drawling tone, “and as 
for the past sixty years I have had a decided weakness for fine cheeks, I should like to see whether there is any foundation to  your reputation …lift your 
skirts.”  
That last phrase, energetically spoken, sufficed as an order; not only did I 
offer a view of the treasure, but I moved it as near as possible to his 
connoisseur’s nose. At first I stand erect, then little by little I bend forward and exhibit the object of his devotion in every form and aspect most apt to please 
him. With each movement, I feel the old scoundrel’s hands wander over the 
surface, scouting the terrain, probing the geography, sometimes creating a more 
consolida ted effect, sometimes attempting to give it a more generous cast, 
compressing here, broadening there . 
“The hole is ample, very ample,” says he, “appearances attest a furious 
sodomistical prostitution.”  
“Alas, Monsieur,” I concede, “we are living in an age when men are so 
capricious that in order to please them, one must indeed be prepared for virtually anything, and consent to it all.”  
Whereupon I feel his mouth glue itself hermetically to my asshole, and his 
tongue strive to penetrate into the chasm; I sei ze my opportunity, as I have 
been advised, and profiting from my situation, slide out, directly upon his probing tongue, the warmest, most humid, densest eructation. The maneuver 
displeases him not at all, but on the other hand does little to animate him; 
finally, after I have unleashed half a dozen winds, he gets to his feet, leads me to his bed, and points to an earthenware crock in which four cat -o’-nine-tails 
are marinating. Above the crock hang several whips suspended from gilded 
hooks . 
“Arm yourself,” murmurs the roué, “take a cat -o’-nine-tails and one of those 
other weapons, here is my ass. As you observe, it is dry, lean, and exceedingly 
well seasoned. Touch it.”  
I do so; he continues:  
“You notice,” says he, “that it’s old, toughened by severe treatm ent, and it’s 
not to be warmed save by the most incredibly excessive attacks. I am going to 
keep myself in this posture,” and while speaking he stretched out upon the bed 
and rested his knees on the floor. “Employ those instruments, first one, then the 
other, now the cat -o’-nine-tails, now the whip. This is going to take a little time, but you will receive an unequivocal sign when the climax approaches. As 
soon as you see something out of the ordinary happening to this ass of mine, 
hold yourself in readines s to imitate what you see it doing; we will then 
exchange places, I shall kneel down before your splendid buttocks, you shall do 
what you shall have observed me do, and I shall discharge. But above all do 
not become impatient; I warn you once again: this business is not to be 
accomplished in haste.”  
I begin, I alternate weapons in accordance with his prescription. But, my 
God! what nonchalance, what stoicism! I was drenched in sweat; that my strokes be more freely applied he had suggested I roll my sleeves to above the 
elbow. Three -quarters of an hour went by and I was still beating him, putting 
every ounce of  strength into my blows, sometimes tearing at his stubborn flesh 
with the cat -o’-nine-tails, sometimes with the steel- tipped thongs, three -
quarters of an hour, I say, and it seemed as if I had got nowhere. Still, silent, 
our lecher was as quiet as death; one might say he was mutely savoring the 
interior stirrings of delight quickened by this ordeal, but there was no outward sign of pleasure, not a single  indication of pleasure’s influence even upon his 
skin. I proceeded. By and by I heard a clock strike two and realized I had been 
at work three whole hours; then all of a sudden I see his rump rise, his buttocks 
part, I slash and send my thongs whistling b etween certain crevices; a turd 
emerges, falls, I whip away, my blows send the shit flying to the floor . 
“Courage,” I say to him, “we’re within sight of port.” 
And then my man gets up in a rage; his prick, hard and in fierce revolt, is 
glued to his belly . 
“Do what I did,” says he, “imitate me, I need nothing now but shit and 
you’ll have my fuck.”  
I promptly adopt the position he has just abandoned, he kneels as he said he 
would, and into his mouth I lay an egg which I have been holding in store for him for three days. As he receives it his fuck leaps, and he flings himself 
backward, shouting with joy, but without swallowing, and indeed without 
keeping the turd in his mouth for more than a second. In conclusion let me say, 
Messieurs, that, your Lordships exce pted, for you are without doubt superior 
examples of this species, I have seen few men convulse more frantically, few 
who have manifested a more trenchant delight; he came nigh to swooning as 
he gave vent to his fuck. That séance was worth two  louis.  
But n o sooner did I return to the house than I found Lucile come to grips 
with another old chap who, without having laid a finger upon her, without any preliminaries, had simply ordered her to fustigate him from the small of the back to just above the knees; Lu cile was using a cat -o’-nine-tails soaked in 
vinegar, was endowing her blows with all the force she could muster, and this individual ended his ritual by having her suck him. The girl knelt before him when he gave her the signal and, adjusting his old wear y balls so that they 
dangled upon her teats, she took the flabby engine in  her mouth whereinto the 
chastened sinner hastened to weep for his transgressions . 
And Duclos having therewith put a period to what she had to relate 
that day, and the supper hour no t yet having arrived, Messieurs delivered 
themselves of a few smutty comments while waiting.  
“You must be done up, Président,” gibed the Duc. “I’ve seen you 
discharge twice today, and you’re hardly accustomed to such feats of liberality.”  
“Let’s wager on a  third,” replied Curval, who was pawing Duclos’ 
buttocks.  
“Why, certainly, as much as you like and as often,” the Duc returned.  
“And I ask for only one condition,” Curval said, “and that is to be 
allowed to do whatever I like.”  “Oh, I’m afraid not,” the Duc answered, “for you know very well that 
there are certain things we have mutually promised not to do before the 
appointed time indicated on our schedules: having ourselves fucked was 
one of them —before proceeding to that we were, according to prior 
agreem ent, to wait until some example of that passion were cited to us, 
but by your common request, gentlemen, we ceded on that point and suspended the restriction. There are many other pleasures and modes of taking them we ought to have forbidden ourselves until the moment 
they were embodied in story, and which we have instead tolerated, 
provided the experiments are conducted in privacy —in, that is to say, 
either our closets or our bedchambers. You, Président, surrendered 
yourself to one with Aline just a short while ago; did she utter that 
piercing scream for no reason at all? and has she no motive for keeping her breast covered now? Very well then, choose from amongst those 
mysterious modes, or from one of those we permit in public, and I’ll 
wager one hundred louis you’ll not be able to derive your third from one 
of those legitimate sources.”  
The Président then asked whether he might be allowed to repair to 
the boudoir at the end of the corridor and to take along the subjects he deemed necessary to success; his request was granted, although it was 
stipulated that Duclos would have to be witness to the goings on, and 
that her word would be accepted upon the existence of the discharge or 
upon Curval’s failure to produce it.  
“Agreed,” said the Président, “I accept t he conditions.”  
And by way of a preliminary, he had Duclos give him five hundred 
lashes within view of the assembly; that accomplished, he led away his 
dear and devoted friend Constance, in whose behalf his colleagues 
besought Curval to do nothing which might damage her pregnancy; the Président also took with him his daughter Adelaide, Augustine, Zelmire, 
Céladon, Zéphyr, Thérèse, Fanchon, Champville, Desgranges, Duclos, 
of course, and three fuckers besides.  
“Why fuck my eyes!” exclaimed the Duc, “there was  nothing in the 
bargain that said he could recruit an army.”  
But the Bishop and Durcet took the Président’s side in the matter of 
manpower and firmly reminded Blangis that the terms of the wager 
included no limitation upon numbers. The Président led his ba nd away, 
and at the end of thirty minutes, an interval the Bishop, Durcet, and the Duc, with the few subjects remaining to them, did not pass in holy orison, thirty minutes later, I say, Constance and Zelmire returned in 
tears, and the Président reappeared  soon afterward with the rest of his 
force; Duclos then related the mighty things he had done, paid homage 
to his vigor, and certified that in all fairness and justice he merited the 
crown of myrtle. The reader will kindly allow us to suppress the text of 
Duclos’ report, for the architecture of our novel bids us conceal the precise circumstances of what transpired in that remote boudoir; but 
Curval had won his wager, and that, we consider, is the essential point.  
“These hundred louis, ” he remarked upon rece iving them from the 
Duc, “will be useful in paying a fine which, I fear, shall soon be levied upon me.”  
And here is still another thing the explanation of which we pray the 
reader will permit us to postpone until the appropriate moment arrives; for the tim e being he need but observe how that rascal Curval would 
anticipate his misdeeds well in advance, and how, with unruffled calm, 
he would accept the fact that they would bring down upon him certain 
and merited punishment, a fatal necessity he faced unflinch ingly and 
with a proud smile.  Between that time and the opening of the next day’s narrations 
absolutely nothing out of the ordinary transpired, and therefore we 
propose to conduct the reader to the auditorium at once.    
THE EIGHTEENTH DAY  
Beautiful, radia nt, bejeweled, grown more brilliant with each passing 
day, Duclos thus started the eighteenth session’s stories:  
A tall and stoutly constructed creature named Justine had just been added to 
my entourage; she was twenty -five, five feet six inches tall, with  the husky 
arms and solid legs of a barmaid, but her features were fine all the same, her 
skin was clear and smooth, and she had as splendid a body as one might wish. 
As my establishment used to be swarming with a crowd of those old rakehells 
who are incap able of experiencing the faintest pleasure save when heated by 
the lash or torture, I thought that a  pensionnaire like Justine, furnished as she 
was with the forearm of a blacksmith, could be nothing but a very real asset. The day following her arrival, I decided to put her fustigatory talents to the 
test; I had been given to understand she wielded a whip with prodigious skill, 
and hence matched her against an old commissar of the quarter whom she was 
to flog from chest to shin and then, on the other side, from the middle of his 
back to his calves. The operation over with, the libertine simply hoisted the 
girl’s skirts and planted his load upon her buttocks. Justine comported herself 
like a true heroine of Cythera, and our good old martyr avowed to me 
afterw ard that I had got my hands on a treasure, and that in all his days no 
one had ever whipped him as that rascal had . 
To demonstrate how much I counted upon her contribution to our little 
community, a few days later I arranged a meeting between  Justine and a n old 
veteran of many a campaign on the fields of love; he required a round thousand strokes all over his body, he would have no part of himself spared, 
and when he was afire and nicely bloodied, the girl had to piss into her cupped 
hand and smear her urin e over those areas of his body which looked to be the most seriously molested. This lotion rubbed on, the heavy labor had to be begun 
again, then he would discharge, the girl would carefully collect his fuck, once 
again using her cupped hand, and she would  give him a second massage, this 
time employing the balm wrung from his prick. Another triumph for my new 
colleague, and every succeeding day brought her further and more impassioned 
acclaim; but it was impossible to exercise her arm on the champion who 
presented himself this time . 
This extraordinary man would have nothing of the feminine but womanish 
dress: the wearer of the costume had to be a man; in other words, the roué wanted to be spanked by a man got up as a girl. And what was the instrument she had  to use on him? Don’t think for a moment he was content with a birch 
ferule or even a cat, no, he demanded a bundle of osier switches wherewith very barbarously one had to tear his buttocks. Actually, this particular affair seeming to have somewhat of the flavor of sodomy, I felt I ought not become too 
deeply involved in it; but as he was one of Fournier’s former and most reliable 
clients, a man who had been truly attached to our house in fair weather and in foul, and who, furthermore, might, thanks to his position, be able to render us 
some service, I raised no objections and, having prettily disguised a young lad 
of eighteen who sometimes availed us of his services and who had a very 
attractive face, I presented him, armed with a handful of switches, to hi s 
opponent . 
And a very entertaining contest it was —you may well imagine how eager I 
was to observe it. He began with a careful study of his pretended maiden, and 
having found him, evidently, much to his liking, he opened with five or six 
kisses upon the yo uth’s mouth: those kisses would have looked peculiar from 
three miles away; next, he exhibited his cheeks, and in all his behavior and 
words seeming to take the young man for a girl, he told him to fondle his buttocks and knead them just a little rigorousl y; the lad, whom I had told 
exactly what to expect, did everything asked of him . 
“Well, let’s be off,” said the bawd, “ply those switches, spare not to strike 
hard.”  
The youth catches up the bundle of withes and therewith, swinging right 
merrily, lays fift y slashing blows upon a pair of buttocks which seem only to 
thirst for more; already definitely marked by those two score and ten stripes, 
the libertine hurls himself upon his masculine flagellatrice, draws up her 
petticoats, one hand verifies her sex, the other fervently clutches her buttocks, he 
knows not which altar to bow down before first, the ass finally captures his 
primary attentions, he glues his mouth to its hole, muc h ardor in his 
expression. Ah, what a difference between the worship Nature is said to prescribe and that other which is said to outrage her! O God of certain justice, 
were this truly an outrage, would the homage be paid with such great 
emotion? Never was woman’s ass kissed as was that lad’s; three or four times 
over his lover’s tongue  entirely disappeared into the anus; returning to his 
former position at last, “ O dear child,” cried he, “resume your operation.”  
Further flagellation ensued, but as it was livelier, the patient met this new 
assault with far more courage and intrepidity. B lood makes its appearance, 
another stroke brings his prick bounding up, and he engages the young object of 
his transports to seize it without an instant’s delay. While the latter 
manipulates him, he wishes to render the youth the same service, lifts up the boy’s skirts again, but it’s a prick he’s now gone in quest of; he touches it, 
grasps, shakes, pulls it, and soon introduces it into his mouth. After these 
initial caresses, he calls for a third round of blows and receives a storm of them. 
This latest exp erience puts him in a perfect tumult; he flings his Adonis upon 
the bed, lies down upon him, simultaneously toys with his own prick and his 
companion’s, then presses one upon the other, glues his lips to the boy’s mouth and, having succeeded in warming him  by means of these caresses, he procures 
him the divine pleasure at the same moment he is overwhelmed himself: both 
discharge in harmony. Enchanted by the scene, our libertine sought to placate 
my risen indignation, and at last coaxed a promise from me to arrange for further delights in the same kind, both with that young fellow and with any 
others I could find for him. I attempted to work at his conversion, I assured 
him I had some charming girls who would be happy to flog him and who  could 
do so quite as well; no, said he, none of that, he would not so much as look at 
what I had to offer him . 
“Oh, I can readily believe it,” said the Bishop. “When one has a 
decided taste for men, there’s no changing, the difference between boy and girl is so extreme that one’s not apt to be tempted to try what is 
patently inferior.”  
“Monseigneur,” said the Président, “you have broached a thesis which 
merits a two -hour dissertation.”  
“And which will always conclude by giving further support to my 
contention,” said the Bishop,  “because the fact that a boy is superior to a 
girl is beyond doubt or dispute.”  
“Beyond contradiction too,” Curval agreed, “but nevertheless one 
might still inform you that a few objections have been here and there 
raised to your doctrine and that, for a certain order of pleasures, such as 
Martaine and Desgranges shall discuss, a girl is to be preferred to a boy.”  
“That I deny,” said the Bishop with emphasis, “and even for such 
pleasures as you allude to the boy is worth more than the girl. Consider 
the pr oblem from the point of view of evil, evil almost always being 
pleasure’s true and major charm; considered thus, the crime must appear 
greater when perpetrated upon a being of your identical sort than when inflicted upon one which is not, and this once est ablished, the delight 
automatically doubles.”  
“Yes,” said Curval, “but that despotism, that empire, that delirium 
born of the abuse of one’s power over the weak ….” 
“But the same is no less true in the other case,” the Bishop insisted. “If 
the victim is yours, thoroughly in your power, that supremacy which 
when using women you think better established than when using men, is based upon pure prejudice, upon nothing, and results merely from the 
custom whereby females are more ordinarily submitted to your caprices 
than are males. But give up that popular superstition for a moment, view the thing equitably and, provided the man is bound absolutely by your 
chains and by the same authority you exert over women, you will obtain 
the idea of a greater crime; your lubr icity ought hence to increase at least 
twofold.”  
“I am of the Bishop’s mind,” Durcet joined in, “and once it is certain 
that sovereignty is fully established, I believe the abuse of power more delicious when exercised at the expense of one’s peer than at a  woman’s.”  
“Gentlemen,” said the Duc, “I should greatly prefer you to postpone 
your discussions until mealtime. I believe these hours have been reserved 
for listening to the narrations, and it would seem to me proper were you 
to refrain from employing them  upon philosophical exchanges.”  
“He is right,” said Curval. “Go on with your story, Duclos.”  
And that agreeable directress of Cytherean sport plunged again into 
the matter she had to relate.  
Another elderly man,  said she, this one a clerk at parliament, pa id me a 
call one morning, and as during Fournier’s administration he had been accustomed to dealing exclusively with me, tradition bade him solicit an 
interview with me now. Our conference consisted in slapping his face with gradually increasing force, and  in frigging him the while; that is to say, one 
had at first to slap him gently, then, as his prick assumed consistency, one 
slowly augmented the force of one’s blows, and finally a series of truly bone -
shattering cuffs would provoke his ejaculation. I had  so well apprehended the 
precise nature of his eccentricity that my twentieth slap brought his fuck 
springing out.  
“The twentieth, you say? Why, by Jesus,” exclaimed the Bishop, “my 
prick would have gone dead limp by the third.”  
“There you are, my friend,”  the Du c declared, “to each his own 
peculiar mania, we ought never blame nor wonder at another’s; 
tolerance, I say. Say on, Duclos, give us one more and have done.”  
My last example for the evening,  said Duclos, originally was told to me by 
one of my friend s; she had been living for two years with a man whose prick 
never stiffened until one had first bestowed a score of fillips upon his nose and 
tweaked it, pulled his ears till they bled, and bitten his buttocks, chewed his 
prick, nipped his balls. Aroused b y these potent preliminary titillations, his 
prick would shoot aloft like a stallion’s, and while swearing like a demon he’d  
almost always discharge upon the visage of the girl at whose hands he had been 
receiving this exhilarating treatment.  
Of all that h ad been recounted during that afternoon’s sitting, only 
the masculine fustigations had affected their Lordships’ brains which, now passing hot, were only cooled after prolonged use of the fantasy which had fired their enthusiasm; thus it was the Duc  had He rcule flog 
him until blood seeped from his pores, Durcet employed Invictus to the 
same effect, the Bishop made use of Antinoüs, and Bum -Cleaver 
ministered to Curval. The Bishop, who had done nothing that day, did finally discharge at the orgies, they say, while eating the turd Zélamir 
had been preparing for forty -eight hours. And then they went to bed.    
THE NINETEENTH DAY  
That morning, after having made some observations upon the shit the 
subjects were producing for lubricious purposes, the friends decide d that 
the society ought to try something Duclos had spoken of in her 
narrations: I am referring to the suppression of bread and soup from all 
the tables save Messieurs’. These two articles were withdrawn, and 
replaced by twice the former quantity of fowl and game. They hoped to 
remark some improvement, and in less than a week an essential 
difference in the community’s excrements was indeed perceived: they were more mellow, softer, dissolved more readily, had an infinitely more 
subtle flavor, and the friend s discovered that d’Aucourt’s advice to 
Duclos had been that of a consummate libertine thoroughly penetrated 
with an appreciation of such matters. It was pointed out, however, that 
this new diet might have some effect upon breaths:  
“Well, what does that matter?” asked Curval, to whom the Duc  had 
addressed his objection; “ ’tis very faulty reasoning to maintain that, to 
give pleasure, a woman’s mouth or a youth’s must be absolutely clean 
and sweet smelling. Setting aside all idiosyncrasy for a moment, I most 
willingly grant you that he who requires stinking breath and a foul 
mouth is moved by depravation only, but for your part you must grant 
me that a mouth entirely bereft of odor gives not the slightest pleasure 
when kissed. There must always be some kind of  spice to the thing, 
some flavor there, for where’s the joy if it’s not stung alive? the joy’s asleep, I say, and it’s only waked by a little filth. However clean may be 
the mouth, the lover who sucks it assuredly does an unclean thing, and 
there is no doubt at all in his mind that it is that very uncleanness that pleases him. Give a somewhat greater degree of strength to the impulse 
and you’ll want that mouth to be impure. If it fall short of smelling of rot 
or the cadaver, well, be patient, the taste will develop, but that it have 
nothing but an odor of milk and honey or infancy, that, I tell you, is 
insufferable. And so the diet we’re going to subject them to will, at the 
worst, lead not at all to corruption, but only to a certain alteration, and 
that is all that’s necessary.”  
The morning searches brought nothing to light …the youngsters were 
keeping strict watch over their conduct. No one requested toilet permission, and the company sat down at table. Adelaide, one of the servants at the meal, having been enjoined by Durcet to fart in a 
champagne glass, and having been unable to comply, was directly entered in the fatal book by her unfeeling husband who, since the beginning of the week, had been continually endeavoring to find her at 
fault.  
Coffee came next ; it was handed round by Cupidon, Giton, Michette, 
and Sophie. The Duc  thigh -fucked Sophie, and while so doing had her 
shit upon his hand; the nobleman took that pretty little packet and 
smeared it over his face, the Bishop did precisely the same thing wit h 
Giton and Curval with Michette, but as for Durcet, he popped his little 
device into Cupidon’s mouth as that charming boy squeezed out his 
turd. There were, notwithstanding, no discharges and, having risen from their nap, Messieurs went to hear Duclos.  
A man we had never seen previously,  said that amiable whore, came to 
the house and proposed a rather unusual ceremony: he wished to be tied to one side of a stepladder; we secured his thighs and waist to the third rung and, 
raising his arms above his head, t ied his wrists to the uppermost step. He was 
naked. Once firmly bound, he had to be exposed to the most ferocious beating, clubbed with the cat’s handle when the knots at the tips of the cords were worn 
out. He was naked, I repeat, there was no need to lay  a finger upon him, nor 
did he even touch himself, but after having received a savage pounding his monstrous instrument rose like a rocket, it was seen to sway and bounce between the ladder’s rungs, hovering like a pendulum and, soon after, 
impetuously lau nch its fuck into the middle of the room. He was unbound, he 
paid, and that was all.  
The following day he sent us one of his friends whose buttocks and thighs, 
member and balls had to be pricked with a golden needle. Not until he was 
covered with blood did  he discharge. I handled that commission myself, and as 
he constantly shouted to me to thrust deeper, I had almost to bury the needle in 
his glans before seeing his fuck squirt into my palm. As he unleashed it, he 
thrust his face against mine, sucked my mo uth prodigiously, and that was all 
there was to it.  
A third —and he too was an acquaintance of his two predecessors—ordered 
me to flail every bit of his body with nettles. I soon had him streaming blood, he eyed himself in a mirror, and it was not before he  saw his body reduced to a 
scarlet shambles that he let fly his fuck, without touching anything, fondling 
anything, without requiring anything else of me.  
Those excesses entertained me hugely, I took a secret delight in participating 
in them; and all my wh imsical clients were equally delighted with me. It was 
at about the period of those three scenes that a Danish nobleman, having been 
sent to me for pleasure parties of a very different character, which others have 
been designated to discuss, had the imprud ence to arrive at my establishment 
with ten thousand francs in diamonds, as much in other gems, and five 
hundred  louis in cash. The prize was too handsome to be allowed to get away; 
between the two of us, Lucile and I managed to rob the Dane of his last  sou. 
He thought to lodge a complaint, but as I used to pay a heavy bribe to the police, and as in those days one did just about whatever one pleased with gold, 
the gentleman was ordered to put a stop to his wailing, and his belongings 
became mine, or rather most of them did, for, in order to assure myself of clear 
title to that treasure, I had to yield a few precious stones to the minions of the law. Never have I committed a theft, and I would have you remark this 
interesting fact, without encountering some s troke of good fortune the next 
day; this latest windfall was a new client, but one of those daily clients one 
may truly consider a brothel’s bread and butter.  
This individual was an old courtier who, weary of the homages he used 
unendingly to receive in th e palaces of kings, liked to visit whores and enjoy a 
change of role. He wanted to start with me; very well, said I, and we began 
without further ado. I had to make him recite his lessons and recite his little 
speeches, and every time he made a mistake, he  had to get down on his knees 
and receive, sometimes on his knuckles, sometimes on his behind, vigorous 
blows of a leathern ferule such as the regents use in schoolrooms. It was also my 
task to keep a sharp eye out for signs of emotion; once the fire had b een lit, I 
would snatch up his prick and shake it skillfully, scolding him all the while, 
calling him a little libertine, a very scurvy fellow, a worry to His Majesty, 
and other childish names which would cause him to come very voluptuously. 
The identical ceremony was to be executed five times each week at my 
establishment, but always with a different and properly instructed girl, and 
for this service I received a stipend of twenty -five louis per month. I knew so 
many women in Paris I had no trouble promisi ng him what he asked and 
keeping my word; I had that charming pupil in my house for a decade, toward the end of which period he decided to pack his bags and go off to pursue his 
studies in hell.  
However, I too was aging with the passing years, and although  I had the 
kind of face which retains its beauty, I was beginning to notice that my visitors were men more and more often conveyed to me by whim and accident. 
I still had some staunch and dependable suitors even at thirty -six, and the rest 
of the adventure s in which I took a hand belong to the period between that 
time and my fortieth year.  
Though thirty -six years old, as I say, the libertine, whose mania I am going 
to relate in closing today’s session, would have nothing to do with anyone else. He was an abbot of sixty or thereabouts, for I received no one but gentlemen of a certain age, and every woman who would like to seek her fortune in our 
trade will doubtless see fit to impose the same rules barring irresponsible youth 
from her house. The holy man arri ves, and as soon as we are closeted together 
he begs to see my bum.  
“Ah, yes, there’s the world’s finest ass,” he says admiringly. “But, 
unfortunately, that is not the apparatus which is to provide me with the pittance I intend to consume. Here, take hold, ” says he, putting his buttocks 
into my hands, “that’s the source whence all good things do come …. Be so kind 
as to help me shit.”  
I bring up a porcelain pot and place it upon my knees, the abbot backs 
toward me, stoops, I press his anus, pry it open, and, to be brief, agitate it in 
every way I think likely to hasten his evacuation. It takes place, an enormous 
turd fills the bowl, I offer  it to its author, he seizes it, precipitates himself upon 
it, devours it, and discharges after fifteen minutes of the mo st violent flogging 
which I administer upon the same behind that shortly before laid such a splendid egg for his breakfast. He swallowed it all; he had so nicely judged the 
situation that his sperm did not appear until the last mouthful vanished. All 
the w hile I plied my whip, I excited him with a steady stream of comments 
such as: “Well, then, little rascal, what’s this?” and, “Why, here’s a nasty little 
chap, can you really eat shit that way?” and, “I’ll teach you, you funny little 
whoreson bastard; perfo rm such disgraceful things, will you!”  And it was by dint of these actions and speeches that the libertine attained 
the summit of joy.  
At this point, Curval was moved to give the company a before -supper 
demonstration in fact of what Duclos had described in words. He 
summoned Fanchon, she extracted shit from him, and the libertine 
devoured it while the old sorceress drubbed him with all the strength of 
her skinny but sinewed arm. That lubric exhibition having inspired his confreres, they began hunting for sh it wherever any might be found, and 
then Curval, who had not discharged, mixed the rest of his turd with Thérèse’s, whom he had excrete without further ado.  
The Bishop, accustomed to making use of his brother’s delights, did 
the same thing with Duclos, the  Duc with Marie, little Durcet with 
Louison. It was atrocious, why, it was unthinkable to employ such decrepit old horrors when such pretty objects stood ready at one’s beck 
and call; but, oh how well ’tis  known, satiety is born in the arms of 
abundance, and when in the very thick of voluptuous delights one takes 
an even keener pleasure in torments.  
These unclean stunts over and done with, and the doing having cost 
only one discharge, and ’twas  the Bishop who produced it, the friends 
went to table. Having involved themselves in a series of foul activities, 
they thought best not to change horses in midstream, and for the orgies 
would have only the four old duennas and the four storytellers; everyone else was packed off to bed. Their Lordships said so many 
things, did so many more, that all four came like geysers, and our 
libertine quartet did not retire until overcome with drink and 
exhaustion.    
THE TWENTIETH DAY  
Something very humorous indeed had occurred the night before: 
absolutely drunk, the Duc, instead  of gaining his bedchamber, had 
installed himself in young Sophie’s bed, and despite all the child could 
say, for she knew perfectly well what he was doing violated the rules, he 
would not be budged, and continued with great heat to maintain he was 
damned well where he belonged, namely, in his bed with Aline, who was 
listed as his wife for the night. But as he was allowed certain privileges with Aline which were still forbidden with the little girls, when he sought to put Sophie in the posture that favored the amusements of his 
choice, and when the poor child, to whom no one had as yet ever done 
such a thing, felt the massive head of the Duc’s prick hammer at her 
young behind’s narrow gate and contrive to batter a thoroughfare, the 
poor little creature fell to uttering dreadful screeches, and, leaping up, 
fled naked about the room. The Duc followed hard on her heels, swearing like a demon, still mistaking her for Aline. “ Buggeress !” he 
roared, “dost think it the first time?” And fancying he has overtaken her and has her at last, he falls upon Zelmire’s bed, thinking it his own, and 
embraces that little girl, supposing Aline has decided to behave 
reasonably. The same proceedings with Zelmire as a moment ago with 
Sophie, because the Duc most decidedly wishes to attain his objective; 
but immediately Zelmire perceives what he is about, she imitates her 
companion and duplicates her resistance, pronounces a terrible scream, 
and leaps away.  
However, Sophie, the first to take to flight, collects her wits and, 
seeing full well that there is but one way to put an end to this quid pro quo, sets off in search of light and some cool -headed individual capable 
of restoring order, and consequently she thinks to look for Duclos. But 
Duclos had behaved like a pig at the orgies an d got herself blind drunk, 
Sophie comes upon her stretched out unconscious in the middle of the 
Duc’s bed, and fails absolutely to bring her to her senses. Desperate, 
knowing not to whom under such circumstances she may apply, hearing 
all her comrades calling for help, she gathers up courage and enters Durcet’s apartment; the financier is lying with his daughter, Constance, 
and Sophie blurts out what has been happening. Constance at any rate 
did rise from the bed, despite the efforts the drunken Durcet made to 
restrain her by saying he wanted to discharge; she took a candle and 
accompanied Sophie to the girls’ chamber: she discovered the poor little 
dears, all in their nightgowns, clustered in the center of the room, and the Duc pursuing now one of them, now another, still persuaded he was 
dealing with no one but Aline, whom he swore was become a witch that night and had many shapes. Constance finally showed him his error, and entreating him to allow her to guide him back to his room, where, she 
assured him, he would find a very submissive Aline only too eager to do 
all he chose to demand of her, the Duc who, thoroughly besotted and 
acting as always in the very best of faith, really had no other design than 
to plant his staff in Aline’s ass, let himself be tak en to her; that lovely girl 
was there to greet him, and he went to bed; Constance withdrew from 
the room, and calm was restored generally.  
They laughed very heartily all the next day over that nocturnal 
adventure, and the Duc declared that if, by great mis fortune, he were in 
such a case to happen all accidentally to obliterate a maidenhead, he 
would not, so it seemed to him, be liable or justly subject to a fine 
because, intoxicated, he could not be held accountable for his actions; but, oh no, the others a ssured him, he was mistaken in that, he would 
indeed have to pay.  
They breakfasted amidst their sultanas as usual, and all the little girls 
avowed they’d been furiously afraid. Not one, however, was found at 
fault despite the night’s alarms; similarly, eve rything was in order in the 
boys’ quarters, and coffee, like dinner, offering nothing extraordinary, they passed into the auditorium where Duclos, entirely set to rights after the previous evening’s riot, amused the company with the following five 
episodes : 
It was once again I, Messieurs, who went on the stage in the play I am 
about to describe to you. The other person in the drama was a medical man; 
the doctor’s first act was to examine my buttocks, and as he came to the 
conclusion they were superb, he spe nt more than an hour doing nothing but 
kissing them. He at last confessed his little foibles: they were all connected with 
shit and shitting, as I had surmised, and knowing what was expected of me, I 
adopted the appropriate posture. I filled the white porc elain pot I used to 
employ for this sort of enterprise. Immediately he is the master of my turd, he 
raises it to his mouth and begins tucking it away; he has no sooner taken a bite 
than I pick up a bull’s pizzle —that was the instrument wherewith I was to 
caress his bum —I shout threats and imprecations at him, then strike, scold him 
for the dreadful things he is wont to do, the infamous things, and without 
heeding me, the libertine swallows the last mouthful, discharges, and is off with the speed of light, h aving tossed a  louis onto the table.  
Shortly afterward another came to the house, and I entrusted him to Lucile, 
who had truly to struggle to make him discharge. He had first of all to be sure 
the turd that was to be served up to him originated with an old  beggar  
woman, and to convince him, I had to have the old crone operate before his 
own eyes. I gave him a venerable dame of seventy, covered with ulcers and wens and other signs of erysipelas, and whose last tooth had fallen from her 
gums fifteen years bef ore. “Good, that’s excellent,” said he, “precisely the sort I 
need.” Then, enclosing himself with Lucile and the turd, that equally skillful, complacent, and determined girl had to excite him to the point at which he would eat that very mature lump. He sni ffed it, stared at it, even touched it, 
but that was all, he could not seem to make himself go further. Whereupon Lucile, having to resort to something more persuasive than rhetoric, thrust the fire tongs into the fire and, drawing them out red -hot, announced she proposed 
to burn his buttocks if he did not obey her on the spot and eat his luncheon. Our man trembles, has another try: the same disgust, he recoils. As good as her word, Lucile  lowers his breeches and, bringing to light an ass of very evil 
aspec t and scarred all over, discolored and withered by operations in this same 
kind, she deftly singes his cheeks. The lecher swears, Lucile applies her iron again, now scorches and finally produces a very definite and sufficiently 
profound burn in the middle of his ass; pain screws him up to resolution at 
last, he bites off a mouthful, additional burnings excite him further, and little 
by little the work is completed. The downing of the last nibble of shit coincided 
with his discharge, and I have seen exceedin gly few as violent; he emitted loud 
cries and screams, howled like a wolf and rolled on the floor; I thought he had 
been seized by a frenzy or an attack of epilepsy. Delighted with the patient understanding he had encountered in our house, the libertine promised to be 
my regular customer, provided I would give him the same girl but a different old woman each time.  
“The more repulsive the source,” said he, “the better you’ll be paid for the 
yield. You have simply no idea,” he added, “to what lengths my depravity 
carries me; I hardly dare acknowledge it to myself.”  
Upon his recommendation, one of his friends visited us the next day, and 
this individual’s depravity carried him, in my opinion, a great deal further, for instead of a relatively mild branding, he h ad to be soundly beaten with 
red-hot tongs, and the author of the turd offered him had to be the oldest, 
filthiest, most disgusting thief we could find. A degenerate old valet of eighty, 
whom we had had in the house for ages, pleased him wonderfully well for his operation, and, rolling his eyes, smacking his lips, he gobbled up the old devil’s 
turd while it was still warm and while the good Justine, using tongs heated to 
such a temperature they could hardly be held, thrashed his bum. And she was furthermore  obliged to snatch up great bits of his flesh with the instrument, 
and all but roast them.  
Another had his buttocks, belly, balls, and prick stabbed with a heavy 
cobbler’s awl, and all this with more or less the same circumstances, that is to 
say, until he  would eat a turd I presented to him in a chamber pot. He was 
not, however, curious about the turd’s origins.  
Messieurs, it is not easy to imagine to what lengths men are driven in the 
delirium of their inflamed imaginations. Have I not  beheld one who, act ing 
according to the same principles, required me to shower bone- breaking blows of 
a cane upon him as he ate a turd which, before his own eyes, he had us fish up 
out of the depths of the house’s privy? and his perfidious discharge did not flow 
into my mout h until he had devoured the last spoonful of that foul muck.  
“Well, you know, everything’s imaginable and even possible,” said 
Curval as he pensively fondled Desgranges’ buttocks. “I am convinced 
one can go still further than that.”  
“Further?” said the Duc  who at that moment was mauling the bare 
behind of Adelaide, his wife for the day. “And what the devil would you 
have one do?”  
“Worse!” replied Curval, something of a hiss in his voice. “It seems to 
me one never sufficiently exploits the possible.”  “I enti rely agree with the Président,” spoke up Durcet, then in the act 
of embuggering Antinoüs, “and I have the feeling my mind is capable of 
further improvements upon all those piggish stunts.”  
“I think I know what Durcet means,” said the Bishop who, for the 
time being, was idle, or who rather had not yet begun to operate.  
“Well, what the devil does he mean?” the Duc demanded to know.  
Whereupon the Bishop stood up and went to Durcet’s alcove; the two 
men whispered together, the Bishop then moved on to where Curv al 
was, and the latter said, “That’s it, exactly!” And then the Bishop spoke 
in the Duc’s ear.  
“By fuck!” His Highness exclaimed, “I’d never have thought of that 
one.”  
As these gentlemen said no more that might shed light on the thing, 
we have no way of kn owing just what Durcet did mean or what the Duc 
declared he would never have thought of. And even were it that we knew, I believe we would be well advised to keep knowledge of the thing strictly to ourselves, at least in the interest of modesty, for there are an 
infinite number of things one ought merely to indicate, prudent 
circumspection requires that one keep a bridle on one’s tongue; there are 
such things, are there not, as chaste ears? one may now and again 
encounter them, and I am absolutely convinced  the reader has already 
had occasion to be grateful for the discretion we have employed in his 
regard; the further he reads on, the more secure shall be our claim to his sincerest praise upon this head, why, yes, we feel we may almost assure 
him of it even  at this early stage. Well, whatever one may say, each one 
has his own soul to save, and of what punishment, both in this world 
and in the next, is he not deserving who all immoderately were to be 
pleased to divulge all the caprices, all the whims and tast es, all the clandestine horrors whereunto men are subject when their fancy is free 
and afire? ’twould  be to reveal secrets which ought to be sunk in 
obscurity for humanity’s sake, ’twould  be to undertake the general 
corruption of manners and to precipitate  his brethren in Jesus Christ 
into all the extravagances such tableaux might feature in very lively color 
and profusion; and God, Who seeth even unto the depths of our hearts, 
this puissant God Who hath made heaven and earth and Who must one day judge us, God alone knoweth whether we have any desire to hear 
ourselves reproached by Him for such crimes.  
Messieurs put the finishing touches on several horrors they had 
begun; Curval, to cite one example, had Desgranges shit, the others 
occupied themselves with e ither that same distraction, or with some 
others not much more improving, and their Lordships then went to 
supper. At the orgies, Duclos having overheard the friends discussing the 
new diet we alluded to earlier, whose purpose was to render shit more 
abund ant and more delicate, at the orgies, I say, Duclos noted that she 
was truly astonished to find connoisseurs like themselves unaware of the 
true secret whereby turds are made both very abundant and very tasty. 
Questioned about the measures which ought to b e adopted, she said that 
there was but one: the subject should be given a mild indigestion; there 
was no need to make him eat what he did not like or what was 
unwholesome, but, by obliging him to eat hurriedly and between meals, the desired results could be obtained at once. The experiment was 
performed that same evening: Fanny was waked —no one had paid any 
attention to her, and she had gone to bed after supper —she was 
immediately required to eat four large plain cakes, and the next morning she furnished on e of the biggest and most beautiful turds they had been 
able to procure from her up until that time. Duclos’ suggested system was therefore approved, although they upheld their decision to do away 
with bread; Duclos said they were well advised to be rid of  it; the fruits 
produced by her method, said she, would only be the better. From that time on not a day passed but they’d gently upset those pretty youngsters’ digestions in one way or another, and the results were simply beyond 
anything you could imagine.  I mention this in passing so that, should 
any amateur be disposed to make use of the formula, he may be firmly 
persuaded there is none superior.  
The remainder of the evening having brought nothing extraordinary, 
everyone retired in order to be freshly res ted for the following day’s 
wedding: the brilliant match to be made was destined to unite 
Colombe and Zélamir, and this ceremony was to be the basis for 
celebrating the third week’s festival.   THE TWENTY -FIRST DAY  
Preparations for that ceremony were starte d early in the morning; they 
were of the usual sort but, and I have no idea whether or not it was by a 
stroke of chance, the inspection uncovered signs of the young bride’s misbehavior. Durcet declared he had found shit in her chamber pot; she 
denied having put it there, asserting that, to cause her to be punished, 
the duenna had come and done the thing during the night, and that the governesses often planted such evidence when they wished to embroil 
the children in difficulties. Well, she defended herself very eloquently 
and to no purpose whatever, for she was not carefully heard, and as her little husband- to-be was already on the list, the prospect of correcting 
both of them was the cause of great amusement.  
Nevertheless, the young bride and groom, once th e mass had been 
said, were conducted with much pomp to the salon where the ceremony 
was to be completed before mealtime; they were both of the same age, 
and the little girl was delivered naked to her husband, who was permitted to do with her whatever he wanted. Is there any voice so 
compelling as example’s? And where if not in Silling were it possible to 
receive very bad examples and the most contagious ones? The young 
man sped like an arrow to its mark, hopped upon his little wife, and as 
his prick was gre atly stiff, although not yet capable of a discharge, he 
would inevitably have got his spear in her …but mild as would have been 
the damage done her, the source of all Messieurs’ glory lay in preventing 
anything from harming the tender flower they wished alone to pluck. 
And so it was the Bishop checked the lad’s impetuous career, and 
profiting from his erection, straightway thrust into his ass the very pretty 
and already very well- formed engine wherewith Zélamir was about to 
plumb his young spouse. What a dis appointment for that young man, and what a discrepancy between the old Bishop’s slack- sprung vent and 
the strait and tidy cunt of a little thirteen -year-old virgin! But Zélamir 
was having to deal with people who were deaf to common- sense 
arguments.  
Curval laid hands on Colombe and thigh -fucked her from in front 
while licking her eyes, her mouth, her nostrils, in a word, her entire face. 
Meanwhile, he must surely have been rendered some kind of service, for he discharged, and Curval was not a man to lose his  fuck over silly 
trifles.  
They dined, the wedded couple appeared at the meal and again in the 
salon for coffee, which that day was served by the very cream of the 
subjects, by, I wish to say, Augustine, Zelmire, Adonis, and Zéphyr. 
Curval wished to stiffen afresh, had absolutely to have some shit, and 
Augustine shot him as fine an artifact as it were in human power to 
create. The Duc had himself sucked by Zelmire, Durcet by Colombe, 
the Bishop by Adonis. The last named shitted into Durcet’s mouth after having dispatched the Bishop. But no sign of fuck; it was becoming rare, 
they had failed to exercise any restraint at the outset of the holiday, and 
as they realized the extreme need of seed they would have toward the 
end, Messieurs were growing more frugal. T hey went next to the 
auditorium where the majestic Duclos, invited to display her ass before 
starting, exposed that matchless ensemble most libertinely to the eyes of the assembly, and then began to speak:  
Here is still another trait of my character, Messi eurs, said that sublime 
woman; after having made you well enough acquainted with it, you will be so 
kind as to judge what I intend to omit from what I am going to tell you …and 
you will, I trust, dispense me from having to say more about myself.  Lucile’s mo ther had just fallen into a state of the most wretched poverty, 
and it was only by the most extraordinary stroke of chance that this charming 
girl, who had received no news at all of her mother since having fled her house, 
now learned of her extreme distress: one of our street scouts—hard in pursuit of some young girl for a client who shared the tastes and designs of the Marquis 
de Mesanges, for a client, that is to say, who was eager to make an outright and final purchase —one of our scouts came in to repor t to me, as I was lying in 
bed with Lucile, that she had chanced upon a little fifteen -year-old, without 
question a maid, extremely pretty, and, she said, closely resembling Mademoiselle Lucile; yes, she went on, they were like two peas in a pod, but this little girl she’d found was in such bedraggled condition that she’d have to 
be kept and fattened for several days before she’d be fit to market. And thereupon she gave a description of the aged woman with whom the child had been discovered, and of the frig htful indigence wherein that mother lay; from 
certain traits, details of age and appearance, from all she heard concerning the daughter, Lucile had a secret feeling the persons being discussed might well be her own mother and sister. She knew she had left home when the latter was 
still very young, hence it was hard to be sure of the thing, and she asked my 
permission to go and verify her suspicions.  
At this point my infernal mind conceived a little horror; its effect was to set 
my body afire. Telling the st reet scout to leave the room, and being unable to 
resist the fury raging in my blood, I began by entreating Lucile to frig me. 
Then, halting halfway through the operation : 
“Why do you want to go to see that old woman?” I asked Lucile; “what do 
you propose to do?”  
“Why, but don’t you see,” said Lucile, whose heart was still undeveloped, 
“there are certain things that one is expected to do …I ought to help her if I can, 
and above all if she turns out to be my mother.”  “Idiot,” I muttered, thrusting her away fr om me, “go sacrifice alone to your 
disgusting popular prejudices, and for not daring to brave them, go lose the 
most incredibly fine opportunity to irritate your senses by a horror that would 
make you discharge for a decade.”  
Bewildered by my words, Lucile  stared at me, and I saw I had to explain 
this philosophy to her, for she apparently had not the vaguest understanding of it. I therefore did lecture her, I made her comprehend the vileness, the baseness of the ties wherewith they seek to bind us to the au thor of our days; I 
demonstrated to her that for having carried us in her womb, instead of deserving some gratitude, a mother merits naught but hate, since ’twas  for her 
pleasure alone and at the risk of exposing us to all the ills and sorrows the 
world ho lds in store for us that she brought us into the light, with the sole 
object of satisfying her brutal lubricity. To this I added roughly everything one 
might deem helpful in supporting the doctrine which sane right -thinking 
dictates, and which the heart ur ges when it is not cluttered up with stupidities 
imbibed in the nursery.  
“And what matters it to you,” I added, “whether that creature be happy or 
wretched? Does her situation have anything to do with yours? does it affect 
you? Get rid of those demeaning t ies whose absurdity I’ve just proven to you, 
and thereby entirely isolating this creature, sundering her utterly from yourself, 
you will not only recognize that her misfortune must be a matter of 
indifference to you, but that it might even be exceedingly v oluptuous to worsen 
her plight. For, after all, you do owe her your hatred, that has been made clear, 
and thus you would be taking your revenge: you would be performing what 
fools term an evil deed, and you know the immense influence crime exerts upon 
the senses. And so here are two sources of pleasure in the outrages I’d like to 
have you inflict upon her: both the sweet delights of vengeance, and those one 
always tastes whenever one does evil.”  Whether it was that I employed a greater eloquence in exhortin g Lucile 
than I do in recounting the fact to you now, or whether it was because her 
already very libertine and very corrupt spirit instantly notified her heart of the 
voluptuous promise contained in my principles, she tasted them, and I saw her lovely cheeks flush in response to that libertine flame which never fails to 
appear every time one violates some prohibition, abolishes some restraint.  
“All right,” she murmured, “what are we to do?” 
“Amuse ourselves with her,” said I, “and make some money at the sam e 
time; as for pleasure, you can be sure to have some if you adopt my principles. And as for the money, the same thing applies, for I can make use of both your old gray -haired mother  and your young sister; I’ll arrange two different 
parties which will prov e very lucrative.”  
Lucile accepts, I frig her the better to excite her to commit the crime, and we 
turn all our thoughts to devising plans. Let me first undertake to outline the 
first of them, since it deserves to be included in the category of passions I have 
to discuss, although I shall have to alter the exact chronology in order to fit it into the sequence of events, and when I shall have informed you of this first 
part of my scheme, I shall enlighten you upon the second.  
There was a man, well placed in society and exceedingly wealthy, 
exceedingly influential and having a disorder of the mind which surpasses all that words are able to convey; as I was acquainted with him only as the 
Comte, you will allow me, however well advised of his full name I may be,  
simply to designate him by his title. The Comte was somewhat above thirty -
five years of age, and all his passions had reached their maximum strength; he had neither faith nor law, no god and no religion, and was above all else 
endowed, like yourselves, Messieurs, with an invincible horror of what is 
called the charitable sentiment; he used to say that to understand this impulse 
was totally beyond his powers, and that he would not for an instant assent to the notion that one dare outrage Nature to the point  of upsetting the order she 
had imposed when she created different classes of individuals; the very idea of 
elevating one such class through the bestowing of alms or aid, and thus of 
overthrowing another, the idea of devoting sums of money, not upon agreea ble 
things which might afford one pleasure, but rather upon these absurd and 
revolting relief enterprises, all this he considered an insult to his intelligence or 
a mystery his intelligence could not possibly grasp. Thoroughly instilled, nay, penetrated th ough he was with these opinions, he reasoned still further; not 
only did he derive the keenest delight from refusing aid to the needy, but he ameliorated what was already an ecstasy by outrageously persecuting the humble and injured. One of his higher plea sures, for example, consisted in 
having meticulous searches made of those dark, shadowy regions where starving indigence gnaws whatever crust it has earned by terrible toil, and sprinkles tears upon its meager portion. He would stiffen at the thought of 
going abroad not only to enjoy the bitterness of those tears, but even …but even 
to aggravate their cause and, if ’twere  possible, to snatch away the wretched 
substance that kept the damned yet amongst the living. And this taste of his was no whim, no light f antasy, ’twas  a fury; he used to say that he knew no 
more piercing delight, nothing that could more successfully arouse him, inflame 
his soul, than these excesses I speak of. Nor was this rage of his, he one day assured me, the fruit of depravation; no, he  had been possessed by this mania 
since his youngest years, and his heart, perpetually toughened against misery’s 
plaintive accents, had never conceived any gentler, milder feelings for it.  
As it is of the greatest importance you be familiar with the subject, you must 
first of all know that the same man had three different passions: the one I am 
going to relate to you, another, which Martaine will explain to you later when 
she refers to this same personage, and a third, yet more atrocious, which Desgranges will doubtless reserve for the end of her contribution as doubtless 
one of the most impressive upon her list. But we’ll begin with the one on mine.  
Straightway I had informed the Comte of the nest of misery I had 
discovered for him, of the inhabitants of t hat nest, he was transported with 
joy. But it so happened that business intimately connected with his fortune and 
having an important bearing upon his advancement, which he took much care 
not to neglect, in that he held them vital to his misconduct, busine ss, I say, was 
going to occupy all his attention for the next two weeks, and as he did not 
want to let the little girl slip through his fingers, he preferred sacrificing the 
pleasure the first scene promised him, and to be certain of enjoying the second. And so he ordered me to have the child kidnaped at whatever cost, but without 
delay, and to have her deposited at the address he indicated to me. And in order to keep you in suspense no longer, my Lords, that address was Madame Desgranges’, for she was the agent who furnished him with material for his 
third class of secret parties. And now to return to the objects of all our 
maneuvering.  
So far, we had done little but locate Lucile’s mother, both to set the stage for 
the recognition scene between mother and daughter and to study the problems 
associated with the kidnaping of the little girl. Lucile, well coached in her part, 
only greeted her  mother in order to insult her, to say that it was thanks to her 
she had been hurled into libertinage, and to these she a dded a thousand other 
similarly unkind remarks, which broke the poor woman’s heart and ruined the 
pleasure of rediscovering her daughter. During this first interview, I thought I 
glimpsed the appropriate way to talk with the woman, and pointed out to her 
that, having rescued her elder child from an impure existence, I was willing to 
do as much for the younger one. But the stratagem did not succeed, the poor 
wretch fell to weeping and said that nothing in the world would induce her to 
part with the one treas ure she had left, that the little girl was her one resource, she herself was old, infirm, that the child cared for her, and that to be deprived 
of her would be to lose life itself. At this juncture, Messieurs, I must confess, 
and I do so with shame, that I  felt a faint stirring in the depths of my heart; it 
advised me that my voluptuous pleasure was bound only to be increased by the 
horrible refinements I was about to give to my meditated crime, and having 
informed the old lady that shortly thereafter her d aughter would come to pay 
her a visit with a man of great influence, who could perhaps render her great 
services, we left, and I bent all my efforts to employing the lures and devices I 
usually relied upon to snare game. I had carefully examined the little  girl, she 
was worth my going to some trouble: fifteen years of age, a pretty figure, a 
very lovely skin, and very pretty features. She arrived three days later, and 
after having examined every part of her body and found nothing but what 
was very charming,  dimpled, and very neat despite the poor nourishment she 
had for so long had to put up with, I passed her along to Madame Desgranges: 
this transaction marked the beginning of our commercial relations.  
His private affairs attended to, our Comte reappeared; Lucile conducts him 
to her mother’s home, and ’tis  at this point begins the scene I wish to describe. 
The old mother was found in bed, the room was without heat although we 
were then in the midst of a bitterly cold winter; beside her bed sat a wooden 
crock  containing milk. The Comte pissed into the crock as soon as he had 
entered. To prevent any possible trouble, and in order to feel himself the 
undisputed master of the fort, the Comte had posted two of his minions, a pair of strapping lads, on the stairway , and they were to offer a stubborn obstacle to 
any undesirable coming up or going down.  
“My dear old buggeress ,” intoned the Comte, “we have come here with your 
daughter, you see her there, and a damned pretty whore she is, upon my soul; 
we have come here, I say, to relieve what ails you, wretched old leper that you 
are, but before we can help you, you must tell us what’s amiss. Well, go on, speak,” he said, seating himself and beginning to palpate Lucile’s buttocks, “go 
on, I say, itemize your sufferings. ” 
“Alas!” said the good woman, “you come with that vixen not to help me but 
to insult me.”  
“Vixen? How’s this,” said the Comte, “you dare use insults with your 
daughter? By God,” he went on, rising to his feet and dragging the old thing from her litter, “g et out of that bed, get down on your knees, and ask to be 
forgiven for the language you have just employed.”  
There was no way to resist.  
“And you, Lucile, lift your skirts and have your mother kiss your cheeks, and 
I am damned certain she wants nothing mor e than to kiss them, eager as she 
must be for some kind of reconciliation.”  
The insolent Lucile rubs her ass upon the seamed and wrinkled visage of her 
dear old mother; overwhelming her with a tirade of playful epithets, the 
Comte permits the poor woman to  crawl back into bed, and then resumes the 
conversation. “I tell you once again,” he says, “that if you recite all your 
troubles to me, I’ll take the best care of you.”  
The woe -ridden are credulous; and they love to lament. The old woman 
made them privy to  all her sufferings, and complained especially, with great 
bitterness, of the theft of her daughter; she sharply accused Lucile of having had 
a hand in it and of knowing where the child presently was, since the lady with 
whom she had come a little while ag o had proposed to take her under her wing; 
that was the basis for her supposition (and there was considerable logic in the 
way she argued) that this same lady had taken her away. Meanwhile, the 
Comte, directly facing Lucile’s ass, for by this time he had g ot her to step out of 
her skirts, the Comte, I say, now and again kissing that handsome ass and 
frigging himself uninterruptedly, listened, put questions to her, requested 
details, and regulated all the titillations of his perfidious lust according to the old woman’s replies. But when she said that the absence of her daughter, 
thanks to whose work she was procured her wherewithal, was going to lead her 
gradually but inexorably to the grave, since she had nothing and for four days 
had been kept barely alive by that small quantity of milk he had just spoiled:  
“Why, then, bitch,” said the Comte, aiming his prick at the old creature and 
continuing to explore Lucile’s buttocks, “why, then go ahead and croak, you foul old whore, do you suppose the world will be an y worse off without you?”  
And as he concluded his question he loosed his sperm.  
“Were that to happen,” he observed, “I believe I’d have only one regret, and 
that would be not having myself hastened the event.”  
But there was more to it than that, the Comte was not the sort of a man to 
be appeased by a mere discharge; Lucile, fully aware of the role she was to play, now that he had been relieved, busied herself preventing the old woman from noticing what he was about, and the Comte, rummaging through every co rner 
of the room, came upon a silver goblet, the last vestige of the material well-being that had once upon a time been this poor wretch’s; he put the goblet in his pocket. This fresh outrage having put new hardness into his prick, he again 
dragged the old  woman from her bed, stripped her naked, and bade Lucile frig 
him upon the matron’s withered old frame. Once again nothing could be done 
to stop him, and the villain darted his fuck over that ancient flesh, redoubled his insults, and said that the poor wre tch could rest perfectly assured he was not 
yet done with her, and that she would soon have news of himself and of her 
little girl who, he wished to have her know, was in his power. He then 
proceeded to that last discharge, his transports of lust were igni ted by the 
horrors wherewith his perfidious imagination was already in a ferment, by the 
ruin of the entire family he was contemplating, and he left. But in order not to 
have to return to this affair, hear, Messieurs, how I surpassed myself in 
villainy. Se eing that he might have confidence in me, the Comte informed me of the second scene he was preparing for the benefit of the old woman and her 
little daughter; he told me he wanted the child brought to him without delay 
and, as he wanted to reunite the whole family, he wished to have me cede Lucile to him too, for he had been deeply moved by her lovely ass; he made no effort to conceal that his purpose was to ruin Lucile as well as her ass, together 
with her mother and sister.  
I loved Lucile. But I loved money even more. He offered me an unheard -of 
price for these three creatures, I agreed to everything. Four days later, Lucile, 
her little sister and her aged mother were brought together; Madame 
Desgranges will tell you about that meeting. As for your faithfu l Duclos, she 
continues and resumes the thread of her story this anecdote has interrupted; 
indeed, she wonders whether she ought not have recited it at some later time, 
for, esteeming it a very stirring episode, she considers it would have proven a fitting  climax to her contribution.  
“One moment,” said Durcet, “I cannot hear such stories without being 
affected, their influence upon me would be difficult to describe. I have been restraining my fuck since the middle of the tale, kindly allow me to 
unburden my self now.”  
And he dashed into his closet with Michette, Zélamir, Cupidon, 
Fanny, Thérèse, and Adelaide; several minutes later his shouts began to ring out, and soon after the uproar started, Adelaide emerged in tears, 
saying that all this made her very unh appy, and wondering why they had 
to excite her husband with such dreadful stories; she who told them, 
Adelaide declared, not others, ought by rights to be the victim. During 
the interim the Duc and the Bishop had not wasted an instant, but the 
manner in wh ich they operated belonging to the class of procedures 
circumstances compel us still to mask from the reader’s view, we beg him to suffer the curtain to remain down, and to allow us to move on to the four tales Duclos had yet to relate before bringing this  twenty -first 
meeting of the assembly to a close.  
A week after Lucile’s departure, I handled a rascal blessed with a rather 
curious mania. Warned several days in advance of his intended arrival, I had 
let a great number of turds accumulate in my one -holed chair, and I had 
induced one of my young ladies to add a few more to the collection. Our man appeared costumed  as a Savoyard rustic; ’twas  in the morning, he swept out 
my room, removed the pot from beneath the chair, and went out to empty it 
(this emptying , I might note in parentheses, took a considerable length of 
time); when he returned he showed me how carefully he’d cleaned it out and 
asked for his payment. But, and this of course was all stipulated in our prior 
arrangement, instead of giving him a coin , I seize the broom and fall to 
belaboring him with the handle.  
“Your payment, villain?” I cry, “why, here’s what you deserve.”  
And I bestow at least a dozen blows upon him. He seeks to escape me, I 
pursue him, and the libertine, whose critical moment has arrived, discharges 
all the way down the stairs, bawling out at the top of his voice that they’re 
cracking his skull, that they want to kill him, and that he’s got himself into the 
house of a scoundrel, she’s not by any means the honest woman he at first took 
her for, etc.  
Another carried, in a small pocket case, a little knotty stick which he kept for 
an unusual purpose; he wanted me to insert the stick into his urethral canal, and, having plunged it in to a depth of three inches, to rattle it with utmost 
vigor, and with my other hand to pull back his foreskin and frig his poor 
device. At the very instant he discharged, one had to pull out the stick, raise 
one’s skirts in front, and he would discharge upon one’s mound.  
Six months later I had to do with an a bbot who wanted me to take a 
burning candle and direct the drops of molten tallow so that they fell upon his penis and balls; it required nothing more than the sensation this ceremony 
produced to bring about his discharge. His machine required no touching,  but 
it remained limp throughout; before they would yield fuck, his genitals had to be given such a heavy coating of wax that toward the end there was no recognizing this strange object as a part of the human anatomy. 
That ecclesiastic had a friend who loved nothing so much as to offer his bum 
to be perforated by a multitude of gold pins, and when thus decorated, his hindquarter far more resembling a pincushion than an ordinary ass, he would 
sit down, the better to savor the effect he cherished, and, presen ting one’s very 
widespread buttocks to him, he would twiddle his member and discharge into 
one’s vent.  
“Durcet,” said the Duc, “I should very much like to see that sweet 
chubby ass of yours studded all over with golden pins, ah yes, I’m persuaded ’twould  thus appear more interesting than ever.”  
“Your Grace,” quoth the financier, “you know that for forty years it 
has been my glory and my honor to imitate you in all things; I but ask you to have the kindness to set me an example, and you have my word 
that I w ill follow it.”  
“God’s loin- scum!” exclaimed the good Curval, who had not until 
now been heard from, “by His sacred seed, I do declare that story about Lucile has made me stiff! I’ve held my peace, but my head’s been at work 
none the less. Look here,” said  he, exhibiting his prick standing high, 
“see whether I do not say true. I’ve a furious impatience to hear the 
denouement of the story of those three buggeresses ; I have the highest 
hope they’ll meet one another in a common grave.”  
“Softly there, softly,” said the Duc, “let’s not anticipate events. Were 
you not stiff, Monsieur le Président, you’d not be in such a hurry to hear 
talk of wheels and gibbets. You resemble a great many other of Justice’s servitors, whose pricks, they say, rise up every time they pronounce the 
sentence of death.”  
“Never mind the magistrature,” Curval replied, “the fact remains that 
I am enchanted by Duclos’ doings, that I find her a charming girl, and that her story of the Comte has put me in a dreadful state, and in this 
state, I say, I could be easily persuaded to go abroad, stop a carriage on 
the highway, and rob its occupants.”  
“Ah, Président, take care,” said the Bishop; “keep a hand upon 
yourself, my dear fellow, else we’ll cease to be in safety here. One such 
slip, and the le ast we could expect would be the noose for all of us.”  
“The noose? Ah, the noose, yes …but not for us. However, I don’t for 
a minute deny I’d myself gladly condemn these young ladies here to be hanged, and especially Madame la Duchesse, who’s lying like a c ow 
upon my sofa and who, merely because she’s got a spoonful of modified 
fuck in the womb, fancies no one dares touch her any more.”  
“Oh,” said Constance, “ ’tis surely not with you I count upon being 
respected because of my state. Your loathing for pregnant women is only too notorious.”  
“A prodigious loathing, isn’t it?” said Curval with a chuckle, “why, 
indeed it is prodigious.”  
And, transported by enthusiasm, he was, I believe, on the verge of 
committing some sacrilege against that superb belly, when Ducl os 
intervened.  
“Come, Sire, come with me,” said she; “since ’tis  I who have caused 
the hurt, I’d like to repair it.”  
And together they passed into the secluded boudoir, followed by 
Augustine, Hébé, Cupidon, and Thérèse. It was not long before the 
Président ’s braying resounded through the castle, and despite all Duclos’ attentions, little Hébé returned weeping from the hurly- burly; there was 
even more to it than tears, but we dare not yet disclose just what it was 
had set her to trembling. A little patience,  friend reader, and we shall 
soon hide nothing from your inquisitive gaze.  
And now Curval himself returns, grumbling between his teeth and 
swearing that all those dratted laws prevent a man from discharging at 
his ease, etc.; their Lordships sit down at ta ble. After supper they 
withdrew to mete out punishment for the misbehavior that had accrued 
during the week, but the guilty were not that evening in great number: 
only Sophie, Colombe, Adelaide, and Zélamir merited correction, and received it. Durcet, who since the beginning of the evening had waxed 
very hot, and who had been particularly inspired by Adelaide, granted 
her no quarter; Sophie, whom they had detected shedding tears during the story of the Comte, was punished for that misdemeanor as well as 
for her former one, and the Duc and Curval, we understand, treated the 
day’s little newlyweds, Zélamir and Colombe, with a severity that almost 
bordered upon barbarity.  
The Duc and Curval, in splendid form and singularly wrought up, 
said they had no wish to r etire, and having had a quantity of beverages 
fetched in, they passed the night drinking with the four storytellers and 
Julie, whose libertinage, increasing every day, gave her the air of a very 
amiable creature who deserved to be ranked among those object s for 
whom Messieurs had some regard. The following morning, while 
making his rounds, Durcet found all seven of them dead drunk. The 
naked girl was discovered lodged between her father and her husband 
and in a posture which gave evidence of neither virtue nor decency in 
libertinage; it was plain enough to the financier that (to hold the reader 
in suspense no longer) they had both enjoyed her simultaneously. Duclos, who, from all appearances, had functioned as an instrument to 
this crime, lay sprawled near t he compact trio, and the others were 
strewn in a confused heap in the corner opposite the fire, which someone had taken care to keep burning throughout the night.    
THE TWENTY -SECOND DAY  
As a result of these all -night bacchanals, exceedingly little was 
accomplished on the twenty -second day of November; half the 
customary exercises were forgot, at dinner Messieurs appeared to be in a 
daze, and it was not until coffee they began to come somewhat to their 
senses. The coffee was served them by Rosette and Soph ie, Zélamir and 
Giton. In an effort to return to his usual old self, Curval had Giton shit, 
and the Duc swallowed Rosette’s turd; the Bishop had himself sucked by 
Sophie, Durcet by Zélamir, but no one discharged. They moved dutifully into the auditorium; t he matchless Duclos, weak and queasy 
after the preceding day’s excesses, took her place with drooping eyelids, 
and her tales were so brief, they contained so few episodes, were 
recounted so listlessly, that we have taken it upon ourselves to supply 
them, a nd in the reader’s behalf to clarify the somewhat confused speech 
she made to our friends.  
In keeping with prescription, she recounted five passions: the first was 
that of a man who used to have his ass frigged with a tin dildo priorly 
charged with warm water, the which liquid was pumped into his 
fundament at the same instant he ejaculated; nothing else was required 
to obtain that effect, he needed no one else’s ministry.  
The second man had the same mania, but was wont to use a far 
greater number of instrum ents; initially, he called for a very minute one, 
then gradually increased the caliber, ascending the scale by small 
fractions of an inch until he reached a weapon with the dimensions of a 
veritable fieldpiece, and only discharged upon receiving a torrent from its 
muzzle.  Far more of the mysterious was required to please the third one’s 
palate: at the outset of the game, he had an enormous instrument 
introduced into his ass, then it was withdrawn, he would shit, would eat 
what he had just rendered, and next  he had to be flogged. The flogging 
administered, it was time to reinsert the formidable device in his rectum, 
then once again it was removed, and now it was the whore’s turn to shit, 
and after that she picked up the whip again and lashed him while he munc hed what she had done; a third time, yes, a third time the 
instrument was driven home, and that, plus the girl’s turd he finished eating, was sufficient to complete his happiness.  
In her fourth tale, Duclos made mention of a man who would have all 
his joints bound with strings; in order to make his discharge even more delicious, his neck itself was compressed, and, half choking, he would shoot his fuck squarely at the whore’s asshole.  
And in her fifth, she referred to that individual who used to tie a 
slend er cord tightly to his glans; the girl, naked, would pass the other 
end of the cord between her thighs, and walk away from him, drawing 
the cord taut and offering the patient a full view of her ass; he would 
then discharge.  
Truly exhausted after having fulfilled her task, the storyteller begged 
leave to retire, and she was allowed to. A few moments were devoted to 
uttering smutty comments upon this and that, and then the four libertines went to supper, but everyone felt the effects of our two 
principal acto rs’ disorderliness. At the orgies they were also as prudent 
and restrained as ’twere  possible for such debauchees to be, and the 
entire household went more or less quietly to bed.    
THE TWENTY -THIRD DAY  
“But how is it possible to shout and roar the way you do when you 
discharge?” the Duc demanded of Curval upon bidding him good 
morning on the 23rd. “Why the devil must you scream that way? I’ve 
never seen such violent discharges.”  
“Why, by God,” Curval replied, “is it for you, whom one can hear a 
league away, to address such a reproach to a modest man like myself? Those little murmurs you hear, my good friend, are caused by my 
extremely sensitive nervous system; the objects which excite our passions create such a lively commotion in the electrically charged fluid that flows 
in our nerves, the shock received by the animal spirits composing this 
fluid is of such a degree of violence, that the entire mechanism is rattled 
by these effects, and one is just as powerless to suppress one’s cries when 
overwhelmed by t he terrible blows imparted by pleasure, as one would be 
when assailed by the powerful emotions of pain.”  
“Well, you define the thing very well, Président, but what was the 
delicate object that could have produced such a vibration in your animal 
spirits?”  
“I was very energetically sucking Adonis’ prick, his mouth, and his 
asshole, for I was cast down with despair at not being able to do more to 
my couch companion; all the while I made the best of my hard situation, Antinoüs, seconded by your dear daughter Julie, labored, each in his own 
way, to evacuate the liquor whose eventual outpouring occasioned the 
musical sounds which, you say, struck your ears.”  
“And it all worked so well that now, today,” said the Duc, “you’re as 
weak as a baby.”  “No, your Grace, not  at all,” Curval declared; “deign but to observe 
my career, my motions today, and but do me the honor of judging my 
style and vehemence in sport, and you shall see me conduct myself quite 
as ever, and assuredly as well as you yourself.”  
They were at this p oint in the conversation when Durcet arrived to 
say breakfast was being served. They passed into the girls’ quarters, where those eight charming little houris were distributing cups of coffee and hot water; the Duc therewith demanded to know of Durcet, the  
month’s steward and presiding officer, why was it the coffee was being served with water?  
“You’ll have it with milk whenever you wish,” said the financier. 
“Would you prefer it thus now?”  
The Duc said that yes, he would.  
“Augustine, my dear,” Durcet said,  “a little milk in Monsieur le Duc’s 
cup, if you please.”  
Thereupon the little girl, prepared for any eventuality, placed Blangis’ 
cup beneath her ass, and through her anus squeezed three or four 
spoonfuls of milk, very clear and perfectly fresh. This cunning feat 
produced much pleasant laughter, everyone requested milk in his coffee. 
All the asses were charged in the same way Augustine’s was: ’twas  an 
agreeable little surprise the month’s director of games had thought to give his colleagues. Fanny poured s ome into the Bishop’s cup, Zelmire 
into Curval’s, and Michette into the financier’s; the friends took a 
second round of coffee, and the four other girls performed over these 
new cups the same ceremony their comrades had over the first cups; and 
so on and on; the whole thing entertained their Lordships immoderately. 
It heated the Bishop’s brain; he affirmed he wanted something beside 
milk, and the lovely Sophie stepped forth to satisfy him. Although all eight definitely wished to shit, they had been strongly  urged to exercise 
self-restraint while dispensing the milk, and this first time to yield 
absolutely nothing else.  
Next, they paid the little boys a good- morning visit; Curval induced 
Zélamir to shit for him, the Duc applauded what Giton brought to light. 
Two subaltern fuckers, Constance, and Rosette provided the spectacle in 
the chapel latrine. Rosette was one of those upon whom the old formula for promoting indigestion had been tried out; at coffee, she had had the 
world’s worst time keeping her milk free  of foreign ingredients, and now, 
seated upon the throne, she released the most superb turd you could 
hope to lay eyes upon. Duclos was congratulated, they said her system 
was a resounding success, and from then on they used it every day; never 
once did it  fail them. The conversation at dinner was enlivened by the 
breakfast’s pleasantry, and a number of other things of the same kind 
were invented and proposed; we shall perhaps have occasion to mention 
them in the sequel.  
After- dinner coffee was served by four subjects of the same age: to 
wit, Zelmire, Augustine, Zéphyr, and Adonis. The Duc thigh -fucked 
Augustine while tickling her anus with his thumb, Curval did the same 
thing with Zelmire, but may or may not have used his thumb, his hand 
was not in clear view; the Bishop toiled between Zéphyr’s tightly 
squeezed legs, and the financier fucked Adonis’ mouth. Augustine announced that she was all ready to shit, how would they like her to do a 
little shit? The poor dear could not wait another moment, she too had 
been exposed to the indigestion- producing experiments. Curval 
beckoned her to him, opened his mouth, and the delightful little girl 
dropped a monstrous turd into it; the Président gobbled it up in a trice, 
not without unleashing a veritable stream of fuck into Fanchon’s hands.  “There you are,” he said to the Duc, “you see that nighttime 
merriment has no damaging effect upon the following day’s pleasures; 
you’re lagging behind, Monsieur le Duc.”  
“I’ll not be behind for long,” said the latter, to whom Zelmire , 
inspired by an urge no less imperious, was rendering the same service 
Augustine had a moment before rendered Curval. And, yes, as he 
pronounces those words, the Duc topples over, utters piercing shrieks, swallows shit, and discharges like a madman.  
“Enough of this,” said the stern, austere voice of the Bishop, 
moderation’s exponent; “at least two of us must preserve our strength for the stories.”  
Durcet, who, unlike the Duc and Curval, had no surfeit of fuck to 
fling carelessly about, assented wholehearte dly, and after the shortest 
possible nap, they installed themselves in the auditorium, where, in the 
following terms, the spellbinding Duclos resumed her brilliant and 
lascivious history:  
Why is it, Messieurs,  the radiant creature inquired, that in this wo rld 
there are men whose hearts have been so numbed, whose sentiments of honor 
and delicacy have been so deadened, that one sees them pleased and amused by 
what degrades and soils them? One is even led to suppose their joy can be 
mined nowhere save from the  depths of opprobrium, that, for such men, delight 
cannot exist elsewhere save in what brings them into consort with dishonor 
and infamy. To what I am going now to recount to you, my Lords, to the various instances I shall lay before you in order to prove my assertion, do not 
reply, saying that ’tis physical sensation which is the foundation of these 
subsequent pleasures; I know, to be sure, physical sensation is involved herein, but be perfectly certain that it does not exist in some sort save thanks to th e 
powerful support given it by moral sensation, and be sure as well that, were you to provide these individuals with the same physical sensation and to omit 
to join to it all that the moral may yield, you’d fail entirely to stir them.  
There very often came  to me a man of whose name and quality I was 
ignorant, but who, however, I knew most certainly to be a man of circumstance. The kind of woman with whom I married him made no 
difference at all: beautiful or ugly, old or young, it was all the same to him; hi s 
partner had only to play her role competently, and that role was as follows: 
ordinarily, he would come to the house in the morning, he would enter, as 
though by accident, into a room where a girl lay upon a bed, her skirts raised to 
above her waist and i n the attitude of a woman frigging herself. Immediately 
his entrance was noticed, the woman, as if surprised, would spring from the 
bed. 
“What are you doing here, villain?” she would ask very crossly; “who gave 
you permission to disturb me?” 
He would beg f orgiveness, his apologies would go unheeded, and all the 
while showering him with a renewed deluge of the harshest and most biting 
invectives, she would fall to giving him furious kicks upon the posterior, and 
she would become all the more certain of her a im as the patient, far from 
dodging or shielding  his behind, would unfailingly turn himself and present 
the target within easy range, although looking for all the world as if he wished only to escape this punishment and flee the room. The kicking is redoub led, he 
cries to be spared, blows and curses are the only replies he receives, and as soon 
as he feels he is sufficiently excited, he promptly draws his prick from his 
breeches, which he has hitherto kept tightly buttoned, and lightly giving his 
device thr ee or four flicks of the wrist, he discharges while rushing away under 
an unremitting storm of kicks and abuses.  
A second personage, either tougher or more accustomed to this sort of 
exercise, would not enter the lists save with a street porter or some oth er stout rascal willing to sweat for his hire. The libertine enters furtively while his 
opponent is busily counting his money; the churl cries thief; whereupon the 
hard language and blows begin. Whereas with the former debauchee, the blows 
were scattered s omewhat over his body, this one, keeping his breeches down 
about his ankles, wishes to receive everything squarely in the center of his 
unclothed bum, and that bum has to be buffeted by a good heavy boot, amply 
studded with hobnails and well coated with mu d. At the moment he felt 
himself about to discharge, our gentleman ceased to parry the blows; planted 
firmly in the middle of the room, his breeches still lowered, and agitating his 
prick with all his strength, he braved his enemy’s assaults, and, at this crucial juncture, dared him do his worst, insulting him in his own turn, and 
swearing he was about to die of pleasure. The more vile, the more lowly the 
man I found for this stalwart libertine, the more scurvy his antagonist, the heavier and the more filth y his boot, the more overpowering would be my 
client’s ecstasy; I had to employ the same tact and discrimination in selecting his assailant that I would have had to devote to embellishing and beautifying another man’s woman.  
A third wished to find himself in what in a whorehouse is called the harem, 
at the same instant two other men, paid so to do and on hand for no other 
purpose, began a dispute. Both would turn upon our libertine, he would ask to 
be spared, would throw himself upon his knees, would not be listened to, and 
one of the two champions would directly snatch up a cane and fall to 
belaboring him all the while he crept to the entrance of another room  where he 
would take refuge. There he would be received by a girl, she would console him, caress him  as one might a child who has come to be comforted, she would 
raise her skirts, display her ass, and the libertine, all smiles, would spray his 
fuck upon it.  A fourth required the same preliminaries, but as soon as the strokes of the 
cane began to rain down upon his back, he would frig himself within sight of 
all. Then this last operation would be suspended for a moment; there would, 
however, be no interruption in the dual attack of blows and oaths; then he’d get hot again, frig some more, and when they saw  his fuck was about to fly, 
they’d open a window, pick him up by the waist, and fling him out; he would land upon a specially prepared dung heap after a fall of no more than six feet. And that was the critical moment; he had been morally aroused by the 
foregoing preliminaries, and his physical self only became so thanks to his fall; 
’twas  never but upon that dung heap he loosed his fuck. When one went to look 
from the window, he was gone; there was an obscure little door below (he had 
a key to it), and he’d  disappear through it at once.  
A man paid for the purpose and dressed like a rowdy would abruptly enter 
the chamber in which the man who furnishes us with the fifth example would 
be lying with a girl, kissing her ass while awaiting developments. Accosting 
the expectant libertine, the bully, having forced the door, would insolently ask what right he had thus to meddle with his mistress and then, laying his hand 
upon his sword, he would tell the usurper to defend himself. All confused, the 
latter would fall to his knees, ask pardon, grovel on the floor, kiss it, kiss his 
rival’s feet too, and swear he was ready to relinquish the lady at once, for he 
had no desire to fight over a woman. The bully, whom his adversary’s 
pliability rendered all the more insolent, now called his enemy a coward, a 
contemptible fellow, a whoreson ass -fucker, and a dog, and threatened to carve 
up his face with the edge of his sword. And the more ugly became the one’s behavior, the more humble and fawning became the other’s. Finally, af ter a 
few minutes of debate, the assailant offered to make a settlement with his 
enemy:  “I see damned well that you’ve got no guts at all,” said he, “and so I’ll let you 
go, but upon condition you kiss my ass.” 
“Oh, Monsieur, I’ll do whatever you like,” sa id the other , enchanted by this 
solution, “I’d even kiss it if ’twere  all beshitted, if you wish, provided you do 
me no harm.”  
Sheathing his sword, the bully directly pulled down his breeches, the 
libertine, only too delighted, leapt enthusiastically to wo rk, and while the 
young man let fly half a dozen farts at his nose, the old rake, having attained 
the summit of ecstasy, loosed his fuck and swooned with pleasure.  
“Every one of those excesses makes sense to me,” Durcet said in a 
faltering tone, for the little libertine was stiff after hearing tell of these turpitudes. “Nothing more logical than to adore degradation and to reap 
delight from scorn. He who ardently loves the things which dishonor, finds pleasure in being dishonored and must necessarily stiffe n when told 
that he is. Turpitude is, to certain spirits, a very sound cause of joy. One loves to hear oneself called what one wishes only to merit being, and it is truly impossible to guess how far a man may go in this direction, 
provided he be ashamed of  nothing. ’Tis once again the story of certain 
sick persons whom nothing delights like the disintegration of their 
body.”  
“’Tis all a question of cynicism,” was Curval’s deliberated opinion, 
pronounced while toying with Fanchon’s buttocks. “Who is unaware 
that even punishment produces enthusiasms, and have we not seen 
certain individuals’ pricks stiffen into clubs at the same instant they find 
themselves publicly disgraced? Everyone knows the story of the brave 
Marquis de S*** who, when informed of the magi strates’ decision to 
burn him in effigy, pulled his prick from his breeches and exclaimed: ‘God be fucked, it has taken them years to do it, but it’s achieved at last; covered with opprobrium and infamy, am I? Oh, leave me, leave me, for 
I’ve got absolutel y to discharge’; and he did so in less time than it takes 
to tell.”  
“Those are undisputed facts,” the Duc commented, nodding gravely. 
“But can you explain to me their cause?”  
“It resides in our heart,” Curval replied. “Once a man has degraded 
himself, deba sed himself through excesses, he has imparted something of 
a vicious cast to his soul, and nothing can rectify that situation. In any 
other case, shame would act as a deterrent and incline him away from 
the vices to which his mind advises him to surrender,  but here that 
possibility has been eliminated altogether: ’tis  the first token of shame he 
has obliterated, the initial call he has definitively silenced, and from the state in which one is when one has ceased to blush, to that other state wherein one adores everything that causes others to blush, there is no 
more, nor less, than a single step. All that before affected one 
disagreeably, now encountering an otherwise prepared soul, is metamorphosed into pleasure, and from this moment onward, whatever 
recalls the new state one has adopted can henceforth only be 
voluptuous.”  
“But what a distance one must first have ventured along the road of 
vice to arrive at that point!” said the Bishop.  
“Yes, yes, ’tis  so,” Curval acknowledged; “but little by little one make s 
one’s way along, and the path one treads is strewn with flowers; one 
excess leads to another, the imagination, never sated, soon brings us to 
our destination, and as the traveler’s heart has only hardened as he has 
pursued his career, immediately he reac hes his goal, that heart which of 
old contained some virtues, no longer recognizes a single one. 
Accustomed to livelier things, it promptly shrugs off those early impressions, those soft and unsweet, those tasteless ones which till then 
had made it drunk, and as it strongly senses that infamy and dishonor 
are going surely to be the consequences of its new impulsions, in order to 
have nothing to fear of them, it begins by making itself familiar with them. It no sooner caresses than it is seized with a fondne ss for them, 
because they are of the same nature as its new conquests; and now that heart is fixed unalterably, forever.”  
“And that,” the Bishop observed, “is what makes mending one’s ways 
so difficult.”  
“Say rather that it is impossible, my friend. And ho w are the 
punishments inflicted upon him you wish to reform ever to succeed, 
since, with the exception of one or two privations, the state of 
degradation which characterizes the situation in which you place him when you punish him, pleases him, amuses him,  delights him, and 
inwardly he relishes the self that has gone so far as to merit being treated in this way?”  
“Oh, what is this glory, jest, and riddle of the world!” sighed the Duc.  
“Yes, my friend, an enigma above all else,” said the grave Curval. 
“And t hat perhaps is what led a very witty individual to say that better 
every time to fuck a man than to seek to comprehend him.”  
And the arrival of supper interrupting our interlocutors, they seated 
themselves at table without having achieved a thing during th e soiree. 
Natheless, at dessert, Curval, his prick as hard as a demon’s, declared 
he’d be damned if it wasn’t a pucelage he wanted to pop, even if he had 
twenty fines to pay, and instantly laying rude hands upon Zelmire, who 
had been reserved for him, he w as about to drag her off to the boudoir 
when his three colleagues, casting themselves in his path, besought him 
to reconsider and submit to the law he had himself prescribed; and, said they, since they too had equally powerful urges to breach the contract,  
but held themselves somehow in check all the same, he should imitate 
them, at least out of a feeling of comradeship. And as they had 
straightway sent word to have Julie fetched in, for Curval was fond of her, she, upon arriving, took him directly in hand,  and, together with 
Champville and Bum -Cleaver, they all four went into the salon; the 
other three friends soon joined them there, for the orgies were scheduled to begin. Upon entering, they found Curval close at grips with his aides, 
who, adopting the mos t lubricious postures and providing the most 
libertine exhortations, finally caused him to yield up his fuck.  
In the course of the orgies, Durcet had the duennas give him two or 
three hundred kicks in the ass; not to be outdone, his peers had the 
fuckers s erve them identically, and before retiring for the night, no one 
was exempted from shedding more or less fuck, depending upon the 
faculties wherewith by Nature he had been endowed. Fearing some 
fresh return of the defloratory whim Curval had just announced , the 
duennas were, through precaution, assigned to sleep in the boys’ and 
girls’ chambers. But this measure was unnecessary, and Julie, who 
looked after the Président all night long, the following morning turned 
him over to the society as limp as an empty  glove.   
THE TWENTY -FOURTH DAY  
Piety is indeed a true disease of the soul. Apply whatever remedies you 
please, the fever will not subside, the patient never heals; finding readier entry into the souls of the woebegone and downtrodden, because to be 
devout consoles them for their other ills, it is far more difficult to cure in 
such persons than in others. Such was the case with Adelaide: the more 
that vista of debauchery and of libertinage unfolded before her eyes, the 
more she recoiled and sought sanctuar y in the arms of that comfort -
giving God she hoped one day would come and deliver her from the 
evils which, she saw only too well, her dreadful situation was going to 
bring down upon her head. No one had a more profound appreciation of 
her circumstances th an she; her mind could not more clearly have 
foreseen everything that was necessarily to follow the fatal beginning of 
which already she had been a victim, however mildly; she wonderfully 
well understood that, as the stories grew progressively stronger, th e 
men’s use of her and of her companions, evolving sympathetically, would 
also grow more ferocious. All that, despite everything she was told, made 
her avidly seek out, as often and for as long as she could, the society of 
her beloved Sophie. No longer did she dare go in quest of her at night; 
her overseers were sharp -eyed, wary, and drastic steps had been taken to 
thwart any more of those escapades, but whenever she found herself free 
for an instant, she would fly to her soul mate, and upon this very 
morning of the day we are presently chronicling, having risen early from 
the Bishop’s bed, where she had lain that night, she went into the young 
girls’ quarters to chat with her dear correspondent. Durcet, who because 
of his duties that month used also to rise  earlier than the others, found her there and declared to her there was nothing for it, he could not both 
carry out his functions and overlook this infraction of the rules; the 
society would have to decide the matter according to its pleasure. 
Adelaide wep t, tears were her sole weapon, and she resorted to them. 
The only favor she dared beg from her husband was to try to prevent 
Sophie from being punished; for Sophie, she argued, could not be guilty, 
since it had been she, Adelaide, who had come looking for her, not 
Sophie who had gone in search of Adelaide. Durcet said he would report 
the fact as he had observed it, would disguise nothing; no one is less apt 
to be melted than a punisher whose keenest interest lies in punishing. And such was the case here, of  course; was there anything prettier to 
punish than Sophie? Surely not, and what cause might Durcet have for sparing her?  
Their Lordships assembled, the financier made his report. Here was 
an habitual offender; the Président recollected that, when he had been at the Palais de Justice, his ingenious confreres used to contend that recidivism in a man proves Nature is acting more strongly in him than 
education or principles; hence, by repeated errors, he attests, so to speak, 
that he is not his own master; hence, he must be doubly punished—the 
Président now reasoned just as logically and with the same inspired verve 
that had won him his schoolmates’ admiration, and he declared that, as 
he viewed the thing, one had no choice but to invoke the law and punish the incurable Adelaide and her companion with all permissible rigor. But 
as the law fixed the death penalty for this offense, and as Messieurs were disposed to amuse themselves yet a little longer with these ladies before 
taking the final step, they were conte nt to summon them, to make them 
kneel, and to read them the article out of the ordinances applying to 
their case, drawing their attention to the grave risk they had just run in committing such a transgression. That done, their judges pronounced a 
sentence thrice as severe as the one which had been executed upon them 
the previous Saturday, they were forced to swear they would not repeat their crime, they were advised that, should the same thing occur again, they would have to endure the extreme penalty, and their names were 
inscribed in the register.  
Durcet’s inspection added three more names to the page; two from 
amongst the little girls, one of the boys rounded out the morning’s 
capture. All this was the result of the experimenting with minor 
indigestions; it was succeeding extremely well, but those poor children, 
unable to restrain themselves another moment, were beginning to 
tumble one after another into states of culpability: such had been the 
experience of Fanny and of Hébé amongst the girls, and of Hyac inthe 
amongst the boys. The evidence found in their pots was enormous, and 
Durcet frolicked about with it for a long time. Never had so many 
permissions been requested on any given morning, and certain subordinate personages were heard to curse Duclos for having imparted 
her secret. Notwithstanding the multitude of requests, leave to shit was 
granted only to Constance, Hercule, two second -rank fuckers, 
Augustine, Zéphyr, and Desgranges; they provided a few minutes’ 
entertainment, and Messieurs sat down to d ine. 
“Well, now you see your mistake in allowing your daughter to receive 
religious instruction,” Durcet said to Curval; “there’s nothing to be done about her now. Those imbecilities have taken root in her head. And I 
told you they would, ages ago.”  
“In fa ith,” said Curval, “I thought that acquaintance with them would 
be just one more reason she’d have for despising them, and that as she grew up she would convince herself of the stupidity of those infamous 
dogmas.”  
“What you say is all very well for reasoni ng minds,” said the Bishop, 
“but one simply must not expect it to succeed with a child.”  
“I’m afraid we’re going to be forced to resort to violent measures,” said 
the Duc, who knew very well Adelaide could overhear him.  
“Oh yes, in good time,” Durcet nodde d. “I can assure her that if she 
has no one but me for her advocate, she’ll be poorly defended in court.”  
“Oh, I know that, Monsieur!” Adelaide stammered through her tears; 
“everyone is aware of your feelings toward me.”  
“My feelings?” protested Durcet. “But, my dear wife, I ought perhaps 
to begin by informing you I have never had any feelings whatsoever for a woman, and assuredly fewer for you, who belong to me, than for any other. I hate religion, as well as all those who practice it, and I warn you 
that, from the indifference I have in your regard, I shall pass damned 
quickly to the most violent aversion if you continue to revere infamous 
and execrable illusions, phantoms which have ever been the object of my 
contemptuous scorn. One must first have lost one’s mind to be able to 
acknowledge a god, and to have gone completely mad to worship such a 
thing. In short, I declare to you before your father and these other 
gentlemen that there are no lengths to which I shall not go if I ever 
again find you guilty of such a sin. You should have been sent to a 
nunnery if you wanted to pray to your fuck -in-the-ass God; there you’d 
have been able to worship the bugger to your heart’s content.”  
“Ah!” put in Adelaide, groaning, “a nun, Great God, a nun, would to 
heaven that I were such.”  
And Durcet, who at the time was sitting opposite her, annoyed by her 
response, hurled a silver plate at her face; it would have killed her had it struck her head, for the shock was so violent the missile bent double 
upon crashing against th e wall.  
“You’re an insolent creature,” Curval said to his daughter, who, to 
avoid the plate, had leapt between her father and Antinoüs. “You deserve to have your belly kicked in.”  
And driving her away from him with a blow of his fist:  
“Go crawl on your kne es and beg your husband’s forgiveness,” said he, 
“or we’ll expose you to the severest ordeal you’ve ever dreamt of.”  
In tears, she cast herself at Durcet’s feet, but he, having got a very 
solid erection from hurling the plate, and declaring he’d have given  a 
thousand louis to have hit his mark, Durcet said that he felt an 
immediate, a general, and an exemplary punishment was in order; another would of course be executed on Saturday, but he proposed that this one time they do without the children’s services at coffee and devote 
that period to amusing themselves with Adelaide. Everyone consented to 
the proposal; Adelaide, Louison, and Fanchon, the most wicked of the four elders and the most dreaded by the women, moved into the salon; 
certain considerations obl ige us to draw a curtain over what transpired 
there. But of one thing we may be perfectly certain: our four heroes 
discharged during that set -to, and Adelaide was allowed to take to her 
bed. ’Tis for the reader to invent the combinations and scene he’d lik e 
best, and kindly consent to be conveyed, if ’twould  please him to 
accompany us, directly to the throne room where Duclos is about to resume her narrative. All of the friends have taken their places near their 
wives, all, that is to say, save the Duc, who  was to have Adelaide that 
afternoon, and who has replaced her with Augustine; everyone then 
being ready, Duclos begins to speak.  One day , said that talented orator, while I was maintaining before one of 
my fellow procuresses that I had surely seen all it were possible to see of the 
most furious by way of passive flagellation, in that I had flogged and 
witnessed others flog men with thorns and the bull’s pizzle : 
“Oh, by God,” my colleague answered, “you still have a great deal to see, my 
dear, and to persuade you that you’ve by no means observed the worst, I’ll send one of my clients around tomorrow.” 
And having given me notice of the hour of the visit, and advised me of the 
ritual expected by that elderly post -office commissioner whose name, I 
remember, was  Monsieur de Grancourt, I made full preparations and awaited 
our man; I was to give him my personal attention, the thing was so arranged. 
He arrives at the house, and after we have retired to a room together:  
“Monsieur,” I say, “I deeply regret having to m ake the following disclosure, 
but I am bound to inform you that you are a prisoner and cannot leave this 
place. I further regret to say that Parliament has delegated me to arrest and 
punish you, and the Legislature has so willed it, and I have its order in  my 
pocket. The person who sent you to me set a trap for you, for she knew full well 
the implications of your coming here, and she could most assuredly have 
enabled you to avoid this scene. As for the rest, you know the facts in the case: 
’tis not with imp unity one perpetrates the black and dreadful crimes you have 
committed, and I consider you exceedingly fortunate to get off with so little.”  
Our man had listened with the keenest attention to my harangue, and 
immediately I had done, he burst into tears and  fell down on his knees before 
me, imploring me to deal leniently with him.  
“Well I know,” said he, “that I have greatly misbehaved. I know I have 
affronted God and justice; but since ’tis  you, my sweet lady, who are appointed 
to chasten me, I most earnest ly entreat your indulgence in my regard.”  “Monsieur,” I replied, “I shall do my duty. How can you be sure I am not 
myself being closely watched? What makes you suppose I have it in my power 
to respond to your pleas for merciful compassion? Remove your clot hes and 
adopt a docile attitude, that is all I can say to you.”  
Grancourt obeyed; in a trice he was as naked as the palm of your hand. But, 
great God! what was this body he offered to my sight! I can only compare its 
skin to a ruffled taffeta. Upon that wh ole body, marked everywhere, there was 
not a single spot which did not bear terrible evidence of the lash.  
However, into the fire I had thrust an iron scourge garnished with pointed 
steel tips; I had received the weapon that morning together with final instructions. This murderous instrument had reached a bright -red color about 
the same moment Grancourt had removed his last stitch. I snatched the scourge from the coals and, starting to beat him with it, gently at first, then with increasing severity, then w ith all my strength, and that heedless of where my 
blows fell, rending him from the nape of his neck to his heels, I had my man streaming blood in an instant.  
“You are a villain,” I told him as I brought the scourge whistling down 
upon his body, “you’re a villain and you’ve committed all sorts of crimes. 
Nothing is sacred to you, and I’ve lately heard that you’ve poisoned your 
mother.”  
“’Tis true, Madame, oh, ’tis only too true. I’m a monster, I’m a criminal,” 
said he as he frigged himself. “There’s no infa my I’ve not perpetrated and am 
not prepared to do again. Come now, your blows are utterly in vain, I’ll never 
mend my ways, I find too much delight in crime. You’d have to kill me to put a 
stop to my joy; crime is my element, ’tis  my life, I’ve lived in cr ime, I’ll die in 
it.” 
And you may well imagine how, these remarks of his inspiring my arm and 
tongue, I redoubled my blows and invectives. The  word “fuck” escaped his lips, however: that was the signal: I lay on with all my might and endeavor to 
strike his  most sensitive parts. He skips, hops, jumps, and capers, he eludes me 
and, discharging, he scampers into a tub of warm water specially prepared to purify him after this bloody ceremonial. Ah, upon my soul, yes! I ceded to my friend the honor of having see n more of this sort of thing than I, and I believe 
we two were able to say at the time that we had seen more than all the rest of Paris, for our Grancourt’s needs never varied, and for above twenty years he had been going every day to that woman’s establis hment for the same 
treatment.  
Shortly afterward, that same woman arranged to have me meet another 
libertine whose idiosyncrasy, I fancy, will seem at least as unusual to you. The 
scene transpired in his little house at Roule. I am introduced into a rather 
obscurely lit room, where I find a man lying in bed, and, posed in the center of the room, a coffin.  
“You see before you,” our libertine said to me, “a man reclining upon his 
deathbed, one who would not close his eyes without rendering a last homage to the object he worships. I adore asses, and if I am to perish, I want to die while 
kissing one. When life shall have fled this frame, you yourself shall lift me into 
that coffin, draw round the shrouds, and nail down the lid. It is my design 
thus to die in ple asure’s embrace, and at this last moment to be served by the 
very object of my lubricious heats. Come …come,” he continued in a broken, 
weak, gasping voice, “make haste, for I am nigh to the threshold.”  
I draw near to him, turn around, I exhibit my buttocks . 
“Ah, wondrous ass!” he cries. “’Tis  well, I am easy thus to be able to take 
with me to the grave the idea of a behind as pretty as that one!”  
And he fondled it, opened it, nuzzled and kissed it just the way the 
healthiest man in the world might have done . “Oh, indeed!” said he a moment later as he left off his task and rolled 
toward the wall, “well I knew ’twould  not be for long I’d savor this pleasure; I 
do now expire, remember what I have enjoined you to do.”  
And so saying, he uttered a profound sigh, g rew rigid, and  played his part 
with such skill that damn me if I didn’t think he was dead. I kept my wits 
about me; eager to see the end of this droll ceremony, I wrapped him in the 
shroud. He had ceased to stir, and whether it was that he knew some secret  for 
feigning death, or whether my imagination had been affected, he felt as rigid 
and cold as a bar of iron; only his prick gave some hints of life: it too was rigid, 
but not cold, and glued to his belly, and drops of fuck seemed to come oozing from it de spite his moribund condition. Directly I have him swathed in the 
sheet, I take him up in my arms, and it wasn’t easy, for the way he’d become rigid made him as heavy as a steer. I succeeded nevertheless in transporting him to the coffin. As soon as I have laid him out, I start reciting the prayer for 
the dead, and finally I nail the coffin shut; that was the critical instant for 
him: no sooner have I driven the last nail home than he sets to screeching like a madman:  
“Holy name of God, I’m coming! Get out, whore, get out, for if I catch you, 
you’re done for!”  
I’m seized by fear, I dart to the stairs, upon which I meet a tactful 
manservant who is thoroughly acquainted with his master’s manias and who gives me two  louis; I proceed to the door, while the valet hastens into the 
patient’s bedchamber to free him from the sealed coffin.  
“Now there’s a quaint taste,” said Durcet. “Well, Curval, what do you 
think of that one?”  
“Marvelous,” the Président replied; “there you have an individual who 
wishes to make himself  familiar with the idea of death, and hence 
unafraid of it, and who to that end has found no better means than to associate it with a libertine idea. There is absolutely no doubt about it: 
that man will die fondling an ass.”  
“Nor any doubt,” said Champvill e, “that he is proudly impious; I 
know him, and I shall have occasion to describe the use he makes of religion’s holiest mysteries.”  
“I don’t wonder he is an unbeliever,” said the Duc. “He’s clearly a man 
who laughs at the whole business and who wishes to accustom himself to acting and thinking the same way during his last minutes.”  
“For my part,” the Bishop said, “I find something very piquant in that 
passion, and I’ll not hide the fact I’m stiff from hearing about it. Continue, Duclos, go on, for I have t he feeling I might do something 
silly, and I’d prefer to leave well enough alone for the rest of the day.”  
Very well,  said that splendid raconteur, here’s one less complex; ’tis  the 
story of a man who for five years regularly applied at my door for the sin gle 
pleasure of getting me to sew up his asshole. He used to stretch out belly down upon a bed, I would seat myself between his legs and, equipped with a stout needle and half a spool of heavy cobbler’s thread, I’d sew his anus completely 
closed, and this fellow’s skin in that area was so toughened and so used to 
needle thrusts that my operation would not draw a single drop of blood from 
his hide. While I worked, he would frig himself, and he used to discharge like a 
mule when I’d taken the last stitch. His  ecstasy dissipated, I’d promptly undo 
my work, and that would be that.  
Another used to have brandy rubbed over every part of his body where 
Nature had placed hair, then I’d put a match to those areas I’d rubbed with 
alcohol, and all the hair would go up i n flames. He would discharge upon 
finding himself afire, meanwhile I’d show him my belly, my cunt, and so forth, 
for that fellow had the bad taste never to want to see anything but fronts.  “But, tell me, Messieurs, did any of you know Mirecourt, today 
président in the upper chamber, and in those days attorney to the 
Crown?”  
“I knew him,” said Curval.  
“Well, my Lord, do you know what used to be, and what I dare say 
still is, his passion?”  
“No; and he passes, or wishes to pass, for a devout and good subject, 
I’d be most pleased to know.”  
“My Lord,” Duclos said, “he likes also to be taken for an ass ….” 
“Ah! by God! said the Duc; and turning to Curval: “what do you think 
of that, my friend? Damned strange taste, don’t you thing, for a judge? 
I’ll wager that once  he’s an ass he thinks he’s going to pronounce 
judgment. Well, what next?” he asked of Duclos.  
“Next, your Grace, one must lead him by the halter, walk him about 
the room for an hour, he brays, one mounts astride him, and when one’s 
in the saddle, one whip s his entire body with a switch, as if to quicken 
his gait. He breaks into a trot, and as he’s started by now to frig himself, 
he soon discharges and, while he does so, makes loud noises, bucks, 
rears, and throws the rider.”  
“That, I’d say, is more diverti ng than lubricious. And pray tell me, 
Duclos,” the Duc went on, “did that man ever tell you he had some 
comrade who shared his taste?”  
“Why, indeed, he did tell me so,” said the amiable Duclos, entering 
into the joke with a merry laugh and descending from her platform, for her day’s stint was over; “Yes, Sire, he told me he had a quantity of 
comrades, but that not all of them would allow themselves to be 
mounted.”  The séance had come to an end, Messieurs were disposed to perform a 
few stunts before supper; the Duc hugged Augustine in close embrace.  
“You know,” he said dreamily, frigging her clitoris and directing her 
to grasp his prick, “you know, I’m not at all surprised that Curval is 
sometimes tempted to violate the pact and pop a pucelage or two, for I 
feel at this very moment, for example, that I could willingly send 
Augustine’s to the devil.”  
“Which one?” Curval inquired.  
“Both of them, bless my soul,” answered the Duc; “but one must 
behave oneself during this sojourn; in having thus to wait a little wh ile 
for our pleasures, we make them far more delicious. Well, little girl,” he continued, “show me your buttocks, perhaps ’twill  change the character 
of my ideas …. Bleeding Christ! look at the little whore’s ass! Curval, 
what do you advise me to do with th is thing?”  
“Put some vinegar sauce on it,” said Curval.  
“Mercy!” exclaimed the Duc, “what a notion. But patience, 
patience …everything will come in good time.”  
“My very dear brother,” said the Bishop in a halting voice, “there’s 
something in your words that  smells of fuck.”  
“Really? For indeed I have the greatest desire to lose some.”  
“And what prevents you?” the Bishop wanted to know.  
“Oh, many things, many things,” the Duc replied. “First of all, I see 
no shit in the pipe, and I’d like shit, and then…I don ’t know— there are 
so many things I’d like ….” 
“What?” asked Durcet just before Antinoüs’ turd cascaded into his 
mouth.  
“What?” echoed the Duc. “There’s, to begin with, a little infamy I 
simply must perform.”  And retiring to the distant boudoir with Augustine, Zélamir, 
Cupidon, Duclos, Desgranges, and Hercule, he was heard, a minute 
later, to utter ringing cries and oaths which proved the Duc had finally 
managed to calm his brain and soothe his balls. Little precise information exists upon what he did to Augustine, but, notwithstanding 
his love for her, she was seen to return in tears and, ominous sign! one of 
her fingers had been twisted. We deeply regret not yet to be able to explain all this to the reader, but it is quite certain that these gentlemen, 
on th e sly and before the arrival of the day heralding open season, were 
giving themselves over to tricks which have not so far been embodied in 
story, hence to unsanctioned deeds, and in so doing they were acting in 
formal violation of the regulations they had  sworn in honor to observe; 
but, you know, when an entire society commits the same faults, they are 
commonly pardoned. The Duc came back and was pleased to see that 
Durcet and the Bishop had not been wasting their time, and that Curval, 
in Bum -Cleaver’s ar ms, was deliciously doing everything one may 
possibly do with all the voluptuous objects one may possibly assemble 
around oneself.  
Supper was served, orgies followed as usual, the household retired to 
bed. Lame and aching as Adelaide was, the Duc, who was scheduled to have her by him that night, wanted her there, and as he had come from 
the orgies rather drunk, as was his wont, it is said that he did not deal tenderly with her. But by and large the night was passed just like all the 
preceding nights, that is to say, in the depths of delirium and 
debauchery, and fair -haired Aurora having come, as the poets say, to 
fling open the gates of the palace where dwelt Apollo, that god, 
somewhat a libertine himself, only mounted his azure chariot in order 
to bring lig ht to shed upon new lecheries.    
THE TWENTY -FIFTH DAY  
However, a new intrigue was quietly taking form within the 
impenetrable walls of the Château of Silling; but it did not have the dangerous significance that had been attributed to Adelaide’s league wit h 
Sophie. This latest association was being hatched between Aline and 
Zelmire; those two young girls’ conformity of character contributed 
greatly to their attachment to each other: both were mild -natured and 
sensitive, no more than thirty months separated them in age, they were both very childlike, very simple, very good -hearted: they had, in brief, 
almost all of the same virtues, and almost all the same vices, for Zelmire, 
sweet and tender, was also, like Aline, careless and lazy. They suited one 
another s o admirably that, on the morning of the 25th, they were 
discovered in the same bed, and this is how it happened: being destined 
for Curval, Zelmire slept, as we know, in his bedchamber. Aline was 
Curval’s bedwife that same night. But Curval, having returne d dead 
drunk from the orgies, wished to sleep with no one but Invictus, and 
thus it fell out that these two little doves, abandoned and brought 
together by fortune, from dread of the cold both camped in the same bed 
and, in bed, ’twas  maintained, their lit tle fingers itched more than their 
dear little elbows.  
Upon opening his eyes in the morning and seeing these two birds 
sharing the same nest, Curval demanded to know what they were doing 
there, and ordering them both to come instantly into his bed, he sniffed 
about just below each one’s clitoris, and clearly recognized that both of 
them were still full of fuck. The case was grave: Messieurs did indeed 
wish the young ladies to be victims of impudicity, but they insisted that, amongst themselves, they behave decently —oh, for what will libertinage, 
perpetually inconsistent libertinage, not insist upon! —and if they 
sometimes consented to permit the ladies to indulge in a little reciprocal 
impurity, it all had to be both upon Messieurs’ express instructions and before their eyes. And thus it was the case was brought before the 
council, and the two delinquents, who neither could nor dared deny the 
thing, were ordered to demonstrate what they had been up to, and before a crowd of spectators to display just what their individual talents 
were. They did as they were told, with much blushing and not a little 
weeping, and asked to be forgiven their mistakes. But too attractive was the prospect of having that pretty couple amongst the culprits to be 
punished the following Saturday; consequently, they were not forgiven, 
but were speedily included in Durcet’s book of sorrows which, incidentally, was being very agreeably filled up that week.  
This chore completed, breakfast was finished, and Durcet conducted 
his searches. The f atal indigestions yielded still another miscreant: ’twas  
the little Michette, she’d been unable to hold the bridge, she said they’d 
made her eat too much the night before, and these were followed by a 
thousand other infantile excuses which did not prevent her name from 
being written down. Curval, his prick jumping like a young colt, seized 
the chamber pot and devoured its contents. And then bringing his angry 
eyes to bear upon her:  
“Oh yes, by Jesus,” said he, “yes, by the Saviour’s fuck, you shall be 
spank ed, my little rascal, my own hand will see to that. There are rules 
against shitting that way; you should at least have given us notice; you 
know damned well that we are prepared to receive shit at any hour of the 
day or night.”  And he fondled her buttocks  very vivaciously while repeating the rules 
to her.  
The boys were found intact, no chapel permissions were distributed to 
them, and Messieurs repaired to table. During the meal, there was 
plentiful and penetrating discussion of Aline’s deed; they ascribed a 
holier -than-thou attitude to her, said she appeared a little hypocrite, and 
behold! here was proof of her real temperament at last come to light.  
“How now, my friend,” Durcet said to the Bishop, “is one still to lay 
any store by appearances, above all th ose that girls parade?”  
’Twas  unanimously agreed nothing was more deceitful than a girl, and 
that, as they were every one of them false, they never made use of their wits save to be more skillfully false. These observations brought the table 
talk around to  women, and the Bishop who abhorred them, gave vent to 
all the hatred they inspired in him. He reduced them to the state of the 
vilest animals, and proved their existence so perfectly useless in this 
world that one could extirpate them from the face of the  earth without 
in the slightest countercarrying the designs of Nature who, having in 
times past very surely found the means to create without women, would 
find it again when only men were left.  
They proceeded to coffee; it was presented them by Augustine, 
Michette, Hyacinthe, and Narcisse. The Bishop, one of whose greatest 
uncomplex pleasures was to suck little boy’s pricks, had been spending a 
few minutes playing this game with Hyacinthe, when all of a sudden he 
reared back and let out, not a shout, but a bubbling noise, for his mouth 
was full; his exclamation was interpreted thus: “Ah, by God’s balls, my 
friends, a pucelage! That’s the first time this little rascal has discharged, 
I’m sure of it!” And, truth to tell, no one had so far observed Hyacinthe 
carry things to that point; he was indeed thought still too young to bring it off. But he was well advanced in his fourteenth year, ’tis  the age when 
Nature customarily heaps her favors upon us, and nothing could have 
been more real than the victory the Bish op thought he had achieved. 
None the less, the others were anxious to verify the thing, and each 
wishing to be witness to the adventure, they drew up their chairs in a 
semicircle around the young man. Augustine, the most accomplished 
frigger in the seragli o, received permission to manualize the lad within 
clear sight of the assembly, and Hyacinthe was given leave to fondle and 
caress her in whatsoever part of her body he desired. There’s no spectacle 
more voluptuous than that offered by a young maid of fift een, lovely as 
the day, lending herself to the caresses of a boy of fourteen and 
provoking, by means of the most delicious pollutions, his springtide 
discharge.  
Hyacinthe, aided perhaps by Nature, but yet more certainly by the 
examples he had before his no se, fondled, handled, kissed naught but his 
frigger’s pretty little buttocks, and it required little more than an instant of this to bring color to his cheeks, to fetch two or three sighs from his 
lips, to induce his pretty little prick to shoot, to a dist ance of one yard, 
five or six jets of sweet fuck white as cream, which emissions happened 
to land on Durcet’s thigh, for the banker was seated nearest the boy and was having himself frigged by Narcisse while watching the operation. 
The fact once indubitabl y established, they caressed and kissed the child 
rather universally, each swore he’d love to receive a small portion of that 
youthful sperm, and as it appeared that, at his age and for a beginning, 
six discharges were not too many, in that he had after al l just delivered 
himself of two without the least difficulty, our libertines induced him to 
shed another in each of their mouths.  Much heated by this performance, the Duc laid hands on Augustine 
and frigged her clitoris with his tongue until he had elicite d several solid 
discharges from her; full of fire and blessed with a mettlesome spirit, 
that little minx shot them off in short order. While the Duc was thus polluting Augustine, nothing was more engaging than to see Durcet, 
come up to gather symptoms of the pleasure he was not provoking, kiss 
that beautiful child’s mouth a thousand times over, and swallow, so to speak, the voluptuousness another was causing to circulate throughout 
her senses. The hour was advanced, they were obliged to omit the 
midday nap and to pass directly into the auditorium where Duclos had 
been awaiting them for a long time; as soon as everyone had arranged 
himself, she took up the thread of her adventures and spoke as hereafter 
you may read:  
I have already had the honor to remark in your Lordships’ presence, that it 
is most difficult to fathom all the tortures man invents for himself in order to find, in the degradation they produce, or the agonies, those sparks of pleasure which age or satiety have made to grow faint in him. Hard it is to credit the 
assertion that one such gentleman of this sort, a person of sixty years and to a 
singular degree jaded by all the pleasures of lubricity, used only to be able to 
restore his senses to life by having the flames  of burning candles applied to  
every part of his body, and principally to the ones Nature has intended for those selfsame pleasures. He would have his thighs seared, his prick, his balls 
roasted, and above all else his asshole: while all this was going forward, he 
would be kissing an a ss, and after the grievous operation had been repeated for 
the fifteenth or twentieth time, he would discharge while sucking the anus of 
the girl who’d been burning him.  
Soon after that one, I had dealings with another who obliged me to use a 
horse’s curry comb on him, to rub down his entire body with that instrument, quite as one does to the animal I have just named. Directly his body was all an 
open wound, I’d next rub him with alcohol, and this second torture would 
cause him abundantly to discharge upon m y breasts —that was the battlefield 
he chose to spray with his fuck. I would kneel before him, squeeze his prick 
between my bubs, and he’d quietly wash them with his balls’ acrid humor.  
A third would have every hair on his ass plucked out one by one. While that 
lengthy operation was advancing, he would frig himself upon a warm turd I’d just done for him. Then, at the same instant a conventional dribble of fuck 
announced the crisis’ approach, I had, to give it the necessary encouragement, 
to drive the point o f a scissors deep enough into each of his buttocks to draw a 
jet of blood. His ass was a maze of wounds and scars, I was scarce able to find 
an open space for my two gashes; immediately the steel entered him, he’d 
plunge his nose into the shit, smear it up on his face, and floods of sperm would 
crown his ecstasy.  
A fourth put his prick in my mouth and bade me bite it as hard as I could; 
in the meantime, as I chewed his poor device, I was expected to lacerate his buttocks with an iron comb whose teeth were gr ound to sharp points; and then, 
at the moment I sensed his prick ready to melt —a very faint, a barely 
perceptible erection would tell me so —and then, I say, I’d spread his buttocks 
prodigiously wide, ease them close to a burning candle I’d kept in readines s on 
the floor, and I’d braise his asshole with it. ’Twas  the burning sensation of 
that candle under his anus decided his emission; I’d therewith redouble my bitings, and would soon find my mouth full.  
“One moment, if you please,” said the Bishop. “Every t ime I hear of 
someone discharging into a mouth I am reminded of the good fortune I 
had earlier today, and my spirits are disposed to tasting further pleasures 
of the same sort.”  Saying which, he draws Invictus near, for that champion was on duty 
in the Bis hop’s alcove that afternoon, and falls to sucking the brave 
fellow’s prick with all the energetic lustiness of a true bugger. Fuck 
explodes, the prelate gobbles it up, and straightway goes to repeat the operation upon Zéphyr. The Bishop was brandishing his  knobkerrie, 
and ’twas  seldom that women would feel completely at their ease when 
he was in this critical state and they were near him. Unfortunately, it was his niece Aline who happened to be within range.  
“What are you doing there, bitch?” he rasped; “I want men for my 
fun.”  
Aline seeks to elude him, he seizes her by the hair and, dragging her 
into his closet along with Zelmire and Hébé, the two girls in his quartet:  
“You’ll see,” says he to his friends, “you’ll see how I’m going to teach 
these wenches to  slip cunts under my hand when I’m doing my best to 
find some pricks.”  
Upon his order, Fanchon accompanied the three maidens, and an 
instant later Aline was heard to utter very shrill cries; then came tidings 
of Monseigneur’s discharge, reverberating howls  which blended with his 
dear niece’s dolorous accents. Everyone returned …Aline was weeping, 
squeezing and clutching her behind.  
“Come show me what he did to you,” said the Duc; “I love nothing 
better than to see traces of my distinguished brother’s brutali ty.” 
Aline displayed I’ve no idea what, for I have never been able to 
discover what went on in those infernal closets, but the Duc exclaimed: 
“By fuck, ’tis  delicious, I think I’ll go off and do the same.” But Curval 
having pointed out to him that time was  growing short, and having 
added that he had an amusing enterprise in mind for the orgies, which scheme would demand a clear head and all his fuck, Duclos was asked to go ahead with the fifth story in order that the sitting be brought to a 
proper conclusion; the storyteller therewith addressed the convocation 
once again:  
Belonging to that group of extraordinary individuals,  said she, whose 
mania consists in wallowing in degradation and in insulting their own dignity, was a certain judge of the circuit court  whose name was Foucolet. 
There’s truly no believing the point to which that fellow would carry his furor; 
he had to be given a sample of almost every torture. I used to hang him, but 
the rope would break just in time and he would fall upon a mattress; the  next 
instant, I would strap him to a St. Andrew’s cross and make as if to break his 
limbs with a bar, but it was only a roll of pasteboard; I used to brand him 
upon the shoulder, the iron I used was warm and left a faint imprint, no 
more; I would flog his  back in precise imitation of the public servant who 
performs those noble feats, and whilst I was doing all this I had to overwhelm 
him with a stream of atrocious invectives, bitter reproaches for various crimes, 
for which, during each successive operation , he would demand, a candle in his 
hand and wearing only his shirt, God’s forgiveness and the law’s, pronouncing 
his entreaties in a very humble and contrite tone; finally, the meeting would 
be brought to a close on my ass, where the libertine would yield up his fuck 
when his head had reached the ultimate degree of distraction.  
“Well now, are you going to let me discharge in peace now that 
Duclos has finished?” the Duc asked Curval.  
“No, not a bit of it,” the Président replied; “preserve your fuck, I tell 
you I need it for the orgies.”  
“Oh, so you take me for your valet, do you?” the Duc exclaimed. “You 
take me for a worn- out bugger? Do you suppose that the small quantity 
of fuck I’m going to lose in a moment will prevent me from joining in all the infamies which are going to pop into your head four hours from 
now? Come now, Président, you know me better than that; banish your 
fears, I’ll be fit again for anything inside fifteen minutes, but my good 
and holy brother has been pleased to give me a little example of an atrocity I’d be grief- stricken not to execute with Adelaide, your dear and 
estimable daughter.”  
And pushing her forthwith into his closet, along with Thérèse, 
Colombe, and Fanny, the female elements of his quatrain, he probably 
did there, with them , what the Bishop had done to his niece, and 
discharged with the same episodes, for, as not long before they heard 
Aline’s terrible scream, so now their ears were treated to another from 
the lips of Adelaide and to the bawdy Duc’s yells of lust. Curval wis hed 
to learn which of the two brothers had been the better behaved; he 
summoned the two women, and having pored at length over their two 
behinds, he decided the Duc had not merely imitated, but surpassed the 
Bishop.  
They sat down at table, and having by me ans of some drug or other 
stuffed the bowels of all the subjects, men and women, with an 
abundance of wind, after supper they played the game of fart -in-the-
face: Messieurs, all four of them, lay back upon couches, their heads 
raised, and one by one the me mbers of the household stepped up to 
deliver their farts into the waiting mouths. Duclos was requested to do 
the counting and mark down the scores; there were thirty -six farters as 
against only four swallowers: hence there were certain persons who received  as many as one hundred and fifty farts. It had been for this 
rousing ceremony Curval had wanted the Duc to keep himself fit, but 
such precautions, as Blangis had made perfectly clear, were quite 
unnecessary; he was too great a friend of libertinage to all ow some new excess to find him unprepared; to the contrary, any new excess always 
had the greatest effect upon him, his situation notwithstanding, and he 
did not fail to produce a second discharge thanks to the humid mistral 
Fanchon wafted into his mouth. As for Curval, they were Antinoüs’ 
farts which cost him his fuck, whereas Durcet bent before the gale that 
swept out of Martaine’s asshole, and the Bishop lost all control in the 
face of what Desgranges offered him. The youthful beauties’ efforts, ’twill  be remarked, came to naught; but is it not true that it is always 
the crapulous individual who best executes the infamous deed?    
THE TWENTY -SIXTH DAY  
In that nothing was more delicious than meting out punishments, in 
that nothing prepared the way for so m any pleasures, and those very 
sorts of pleasures Messieurs had mutually promised not to taste until in 
the stories mention thereof should permit fullest indulgence in them, the 
libertines sought by every imaginable means to trip the subjects into 
states of  delinquency, and so procure themselves the joy of chastising 
their hapless victims; to this end, the friends, having convoked an extraordinary assembly that morning, their purpose being to deliberate upon this problem, they added several articles to the h ousehold 
regulations, infraction of which was necessarily to occasion punishment. 
Firstly, the wives, the small boys, and the girls were expressly forbidden 
to fart anywhere save in the friends’ mouths. Instantly they were seized 
by the desire to break win d, they were without delay to go and find one 
of the friends and administer unto him what required to be set at large; a 
severe afflictive penalty would be the reward for disobedience. Secondly, 
the use of bidets and ass -wipings of any kind were absolutely  outlawed; 
it was generally proclaimed that all subjects without exception would 
hereafter never wash themselves, and never under any circumstances 
wipe the ass after having shitted; that, whenever an ass were found clean, 
upon the subject concerned would lie the burden of proving it had been 
licked clean by one of the friends, and that friend would have to be 
mentioned by name. In response to which citation, the friend would be 
questioned, and, being in a position to procure himself two pleasures, 
instead of only one, to wit: that of having cleaned the ass with his tongue, and that of having punished the subject who had afforded him 
this first pleasure …. Examples of this will be provided.  
Thirdly, a new ceremony was introduced: at the time of the morning 
coffee, at the time of their entry into the girls’ quarters, and also when, 
after that, they passed into the boys’, each of the subjects would 
hereafter, one by one, step forth and, in a loud and clear voice, say to 
each of the friends: “I don’t care a fuck for God; there’s shit in my ass, would you like some?” and those who should fail in an intelligible voice 
to pronounce both the blasphemy and the invitation, would instantly be 
inscribed in the dread book. The reader will readily imagine what difficulties the pious Adelaide and her young pupil Sophie had to 
surmount before being able to utter such infamies, and their inner struggles procured Messieurs some excellent entertainment.  
The foregoing once framed in law, they turned to consider delations 
and decid ed to admit them; this barbarous means of multiplying 
vexations, accepted by every tyrant, was warmly embraced by these. It was decided, fourthly, that every subject who should lodge complaint 
against some other, would thereby earn a one -half reduction of the 
punishment he was to suffer for the next fault he committed. Messieurs 
were in no way deprived by this system, because the subject who had just accused another subject could never know the extent of the punishment 
a half of which, he was promised, woul d be suppressed; and so it was a 
simple matter indeed to give him precisely what one wished to give him, 
and still to persuade him he had got off more lightly than otherwise he 
might. Messieurs agreed upon and published their decision, that no 
delation req uired substantiating proof in order to be believed, and that, 
to be inscribed, accusation brought by anyone would suffice. The 
duennas’ authority, furthermore, was increased, and upon the basis of their slightest complaint, whether true or false, the subject would be 
condemned immediately. In a word, over this small population they 
established all the vexation, all the injustice one could imagine, certain in 
the belief that the more harshly their tyranny was exercised, the greater the sum of pleasures they would derive from their privileged situation.  
All this legislation composed and voted, they visited the chamber 
pots. Colombe was found guilty; her excuses hinged upon the food they had made her eat between meals the day before; she had, said she, been 
unable to resist, she was dreadfully unhappy about the whole thing, and 
this was the fourth successive week she had been punished. The 
statement was true, and she had only to blame her ass, which was the 
freshest, the sweetest, the best made  and most endearing little ass you 
could hope to see. She pointed out she’d not wiped herself, and that, she 
supposed, should be regarded as a point in her favor. Durcet examined 
her, and having indeed discovered a very thick and very broad patch of 
shit, he assured her that, in the light of this, she’d be treated a little less rigorously. Curval, stiff at the time, laid hands on her, and having 
completely cleaned her anus, he had her produce her turd and ate it 
while having her frig him, periodically interrupting his chewing to kiss 
her upon the mouth and to order her to swallow, in her turn, what of her 
own creation he brought to her lips. They next inspected Augustine and 
Sophie, who had been solemnly enjoined, after the stools they had yielded up the night before, to rema in in the most impure state. Sophie’s 
appearance conformed with her instructions, even though she had slept in the Bishop’s chamber, but Augustine was as neat as a pin. Sure of her 
reply, she advanced proudly and said that they knew very well she had, as 
was her custom, lain the night in Monsieur le Duc’s bedchamber, and 
that before going to sleep he had summoned her to his bed, where he had licked her asshole while she had frigged his prick in her mouth. 
When interrogated, the Duc said that he had no remem brance of the 
thing (although the story was completely true), that he had fallen asleep with his prick in Duclos’ ass, that they could substantiate the fact. They went about the matter with all possible seriousness and gravity, they sent 
for Duclos who, se eing clearly what was afoot, lent her support to 
everything the Duc advanced, and maintained that Augustine had been 
called to Monsieur’s bed only for a brief instant, that Monsieur had 
shitted into Augustine’s mouth and then, upon second thought, had 
bade her return to the bed in order that he might eat his turd. Augustine 
sought to defend her thesis and dispute Duclos’ contentions, but silence 
was imposed upon her and, although perfectly innocent, her name was 
written down.  
Amongst the boys, whose chamber s they visited next, Cupidon was 
found guilty; he had done the world’s most gorgeous turd in his chamber pot. The Duc snatched it up and gobbled it up while the young malefactor sucked his member.  
All requests for chapel permission were refused; they then went to 
dine. The beautiful Constance, whom they sometimes dispensed from 
serving at table because of her state, was however feeling fit that day, and 
made her appearance naked; the sight of her belly, which was beginning 
somewhat to swell, made Curval’s h ead very hot; the others, seeing his 
treatment of the poor creature’s buttocks and breasts growing rather 
rough —Curval’s horror for her was doubling every day, that was plain —
were swayed by her entreaties and their common desire to preserve her 
fruit, at l east until a certain date, and she was allowed to absent herself 
from all the day’s functions, save for the narrations, where -from she was 
never excused. Curval started in again with his frightful speeches about child- breeders, he declared that if he had g overnment of the country he 
would borrow their law from the inhabitants of Formosa, where 
pregnant women under thirty are, together with their fruit, ground in a 
large mortar; should that law, he protested, be introduced into France, the population would s till be twice what it ought be.  
Coffee came next; it was presented by Sophie, Fanny, Zélamir, and 
Adonis, but served in a passing strange manner: ’twas  in the children’s 
mouths, one had to sip it therefrom. Sophie served hers to the Duc, 
Fanny Curval’s, Zé lamir the Bishop’s, and Durcet got his out of Adonis. 
They extracted a mouthful, gargled it a moment, and returned it into the 
mouths of those who’d served them. Curval, who had risen from table in 
a great ferment, got stiff all over again thanks to this c eremony, and 
when it had been completed, he laid hands on Fanny and discharged 
into her mouth, ordering her to swallow the whey; the threats 
accompanying his instructions succeeded in making the poor wretch 
obey without the flutter of an eyelash. The Duc a nd his two other 
confreres collected shit or farts; having finished their nap, they all 
trooped in to listen to Duclos, who spoke to them in this wise:  
I will move with dispatch,  said that amiable girl, through my last two 
adventures concerning these unusu al men who find their delight only in the 
pain they are made to undergo, and then with your leave we will pass on to a 
different variety.  
The first, while he had me frig him, naked and standing up, wanted floods 
of hot water poured down on us through an op ening in the ceiling; our bodies 
were to be showered during the entire operation. It was quite in vain I argued 
that, while not sharing in this passion of his, I was nevertheless, like himself, 
to be a victim of it; he replied, assuring me I would suffer n o hurt from the 
experience, and that these showers were good for one’s health. I believed him and let him have his way; as this scene transpired in his house, the temperature 
of the water, a critical detail, was something lying beyond my control. It was 
indeed nearly boiling. Messieurs, there is no conceiving the pleasure he felt 
upon being drenched by it. As for myself, all the while operating with all 
possible speed, I screeched, yes, I confess it, I screeched like a drowning tomcat; 
my skin came peeling off, and I made myself the firm promise never to return 
to that man’s house.  
“Ah, buggerfuck!” exclaimed the Duc, “I have the strongest 
inclination to give the beauteous Aline a comparable scalding.”  
“Your Grace,” the latter replied in a humble but decided tone, “I am 
not a tomcat.”  
And the naive candor in her childlike reply having fetched a chuckle 
from everyone, Duclos was asked to give the second and final example of the same genre.  
It was a great deal less painful for me,  said Duclos; I had simply to d on a 
stout glove, then with this protected hand to take burning grit from a frying pan I’d been heating on a stove, and, my hand filled, to rub that fiery sand 
over my man’s body, from head to toe. His body was so inured to this exercise 
that he seemed to be covered not with skin, but with leather. When one reached 
his prick, one had to seize it and massage it in a handful of that same sand; 
he’d be up like a shot. Then, with the other hand, I placed a small fire shovel, 
heated red -hot for this purpose, und er his balls. This rubbing with the one 
hand, the consuming heat which  rose to bake his testicles, perhaps a little 
touching of my two buttocks, which I had to keep well exposed and within 
reach during the operation, this combination of elements melted him  altogether 
and he discharged, being very careful to spill his seed upon the hot shovel 
where, to his unutterable delight, he watched it sizzle and evaporate in steam . “Curval,” said the Duc, “there’s a man who, ’twould  appear to me, has 
no greater fondnes s than have you for population.”  
“It looks that way to me,” Curval assented; “I make no bones about 
the fact I love the idea of watching fuck burn.”  
“Oh, I know all the ideas fuck inspires in you,” said the Duc with a 
hearty laugh. “And even were the seed to ripen, the egg to hatch, you’d 
perform a combustion with the same pleasure, wouldn’t you?”  
“Upon my soul, I do fear I would,” said Curval, as he did I know not 
what to Adelaide that brought a loud scream from her lips.  
“And who the devil do you think you are dealing with, whore?” 
Curval demanded of his daughter. “What are these chirpings and 
squallings all about? Remember the company you are in. Can’t you see 
that the Duc’s trying to talk to me of burning, provoking, instilling good manners into hatched fuck, and what are you, pray tell me, but a little 
something hatched out of my balls’ fuck? Duclos, I say, continue, if you 
please,” Curval added, “for I have the feeling this bitch’s tears might make me discharge. And I’d prefer not to.”  
And here we are,  said our heroine, come to details which, bringing with 
them characters of a more singular piquancy, will perhaps please you more. You know of course that in Paris we have the custom of exposing the dead before 
the doors of houses. There was a particular ge ntleman, well placed in society, 
who used to pay me twelve francs for every one of these lugubrious objects to 
which, in a given evening, I could lead him; his whole delight consisted in going up with me as near to them as possible, to the very edge of the  coffin if 
we were able, and once we had posted ourselves there, I had to frig him in such 
wise his fuck would shoot  out upon the coffin. We used to run from one to 
another, would often pay our respects to three or four in an evening; it all depended upon the number I had located for him in advance, and we performed the same operation beside each of them; he never touched anything 
but my behind while I toiled over his prick. He was a man of about thirty, and 
I had his trade for at least ten years. I’m sure that, during the period of our 
collaboration, I made him discharge upon more than two thousand coffins.  
“But would he not say something during the rite?” inquired the Duc. 
“Did he not speak either to you or to the corpse?”  
“He would shower invectives upon the deceased,” Duclos replied; for 
example: ‘Here, you rascal, here, take it, you villain, you bugger, take my fuck along with you to hell.’”  
“A very unusual mania, that one,” Curval commented.  
“My friend,” said the Duc, “you can be certain that man was one of 
our own sort, and that he surely did not stop at that.”  
“You are quite right, my Lord,” spoke up Martaine, “and I shall have 
occasion to bring that actor back upon the stage.”  
Taking advantage of the silence which succeeded Martaine’s 
interjection, Duclos went on.  
Another one,  said she, carrying a more or less similar fantasy a good deal 
further, wanted me to keep spies on the watch near the cemeteries and to bring 
in word every time there was a burial of some young girl whose death had 
been caused by anything but a dangerous disease —he was very emphatic upon 
that point. As soon as I had got wind of something suitable, and he always paid me very handsomely for those discoveries, we would set off after sundown, enter the cemetery by one means or another,  and heading at once for the grave 
our informant had indicated, above which the earth had only recently been 
broken, we would both fall to work, dig down to the cadaver, and when once 
we’d uncovered it, I’d frig him over it while he spent his time handling  it and, 
above all, if ’twere  possible, its buttocks. If perchance, and it frequently occurred, he stiffened a second time, he’d therewith shit, and have me shit also, 
upon the corpse, and discharge thereupon, all the while palpating whatever 
parts of the body he could lay his hands on.  
“Oh, my, but that one does strike a response in me,” said Curval, “and 
if I have to make my confession to you here and now, I’ll assure you I’ve done the same thing from time to time. To be sure, I added a few little 
episode s I dare say our rules prevent me from describing at this point. Be 
that as it may, my prick’s got monstrously fat; spread your thighs, 
Adelaide ….” 
And I’ve not the faintest idea what happened next; all we know is that 
the couch groaned beneath its burden,  unmistakable sounds of a 
discharge pealed from the Président’s niche, and I am led to suppose 
that, very simply and very virtuously, his honor the judge had just committed incest.  
“Président,” the Duc called over, “I’ll wager you thought she was 
dead.”  
“Why, indeed, that’s true,” said Curval, “else how in the world could I 
have discharged?”  
And hearing not another word from the several alcoves, Duclos 
brought that evening’s stories to a close with the following one:  
Lest I leave you, Messieurs, with dark i mages and sad thoughts, I am going 
to conclude the soiree with the story of the Duc de Bonnefort’s passion. That young lord, whom I amused five or six times, and who used frequently to see 
one of my close friends for the same operation, required a woman, a rmed with 
a dildo, to frig herself naked in his presence —to frig herself, I say, both before 
and behind and to keep it up for three hours without a moment’s interruption. He has a clock there to guide you, and if you drop the work before having completed t he third hour, no payment for you. He sits opposite you, he observes 
you, makes you turn this way, that way, some other way, exhorts you to ply the 
dildo more energetically, he would have you go out of your mind with pleasure, 
and if indeed transported by the effects of the operation, you should really swoon away with delight, ’tis  very certain you will hasten his. But if you keep 
your head, at the precise instant the clock strikes the third hour, up he gets, approaches you, and discharges in your face.  
“Truly,” quoth the Bishop, “I fail to understand, Duclos, why you 
didn’t prefer to leave us with those other images and thoughts rather than with this innocuous picture. They had some spice to them, some 
color, and excited us powerfully, whereas here we have some sort of 
milksop business which, now that the session is over, leaves us with 
nothing at all in our heads.”  
“No, she did the right thing, insofar as I’m concerned,” said Julie, who 
was lying with Durcet, “and I give her my warmest thanks. We’ll all be allowed to go to bed more peacefully now that they don’t have all those frightful ideas in their heads.”  
“Ah, lovely Julie, you may be very gravely mistaken,” said Durcet, “for 
I never remember anything but the earlier one when the later one displeases me;  you doubt my word? why, then pray have the kindness to 
follow me.”  
And, together with Sophie and Michette, Durcet fled into his closet 
to discharge I don’t know how, but none the less in a manner which 
must not have suited Sophie, for she uttered a piercing scream and 
emerged from the sanctuary as red as a cockscomb.  
“Well,” drawled the Duc, “you surely could not have wanted to 
confuse her with a corpse for that stunt; for you’ve just made her give out 
the most furious sign of life.”  “She was afraid, that’ s all,” Durcet explained; “ask her what I did to 
her and make her tell you in a whisper.”  
He sent Sophie to speak to the Duc.  
“Ah,” said the latter aloud, “there’s nothing in that either to warrant 
screams, or, for that matter, a discharge.”  
And because th e supper call sounded, they suspended their 
conversation and their pleasures in order to go and enjoy those of the 
table. The orgies were celebrated rather quietly, and Messieurs retired 
to bed in good order; not one of them had even the appearance of 
being drunk; and that was extremely unusual.    
THE TWENTY -SEVENTH DAY  
The denunciations, authorized on the previous day, began early that 
morning; the sultanas, having remarked that, save for Rosette, they were all listed for correction, decided that all eigh t of themselves ought to be 
included in the game and promptly went to level accusations against her. 
They reported she had spent the whole night farting, and as this was 
really only a teasing they were giving her, she had the entire harem 
against whom to p it her denials; her name was straightway inscribed. 
Everything else moved along splendidly and, except for Sophie and 
Zelmire, who stuttered just a little, the friends were thrilled by the new 
compliment they had from these brazen little hussies: “God’s fu ck, I’ve 
an assful of shit, wouldst care for some?” And, as a matter of fact, there 
was shit everywhere to be had indeed, for, from fear of some temptation 
to wash, the governesses had removed every pot, every receptacle, every 
towel, and all water. The di et of meat but no bread was beginning to 
warm all those little unwashed mouths, Messieurs noticed that there was 
already a very appreciable difference in the little girls’ breaths.  
“Damn my eyes!” exclaimed Curval as he withdrew his tongue from 
Augustine’s  gullet; “that now signifies at least something; kissing this 
one makes me stiff.”  
Everyone agreed there had been a distinct improvement.  
As there was nothing new or out of the ordinary until coffee, we are 
going to transport the reader directly to the sal on. Coffee was served by 
Sophie, Zelmire, Giton, and Narcisse. The Duc said he was perfectly 
sure Sophie was the sort of girl who could discharge; the experiment, in 
his view, had absolutely to be made. He asked Durcet to keep a close eye on her and, layin g her upon a divan, he simultaneously polluted the 
edges of her vagina, her clitoris, and her asshole, at first with his fingers, 
next with his tongue; and Nature triumphed: after fifteen minutes of 
this, the lovely girl became uneasy, troubled, she flushe d crimson, she 
sighed, she panted, Durcet drew Curval’s and the Bishop’s attention to 
all these manifestations, for ’twas  they who’d doubted her discharging 
capacities; the Duc suggested that, since he had always been confident of 
them, it was for the othe rs to convince themselves, and so they all fell to 
imbibing that young fuck, and the little rascal’s cunt left all their lips moist. The Duc could not resist the experiment’s lubricious appeal; he got up and, squatting over the child, discharged upon her h alf-opened 
fur, then used his fingers to work as much as possible of his seed into the interior of her cunt. His head inspired by what he was watching, Curval seized the little one and demanded something other than fuck of her; 
she tendered her cunning lit tle ass, the Président glued his mouth to it, 
the intelligent reader will have no trouble guessing what he received 
therefrom. Zelmire was meanwhile amusing the Bishop: she first 
frigged, then sucked his fundament. And all that while, Curval was 
having him self frigged by Narcisse, whose ass he kissed ardently. 
However, no one but the Duc lost his fuck; Duclos had announced some 
pretty stories for that afternoon which, she promised, would outdo what 
she had served up the day before, and Messieurs were dispos ed to save 
their forces for the auditorium. The hour having come, they passed to 
their alcoves, and that interesting girl expressed herself in the following 
manner:  
A man of whose circumstances and existence I had not previously known 
anything,  she said, a nd about whom I was later to learn only a little, and, 
therefore, a man about whom I can give you no better than an imperfect portrait, sent me a note, and in it besought me to come to his house, in the rue 
Blanche -du-Rempart, at nine o’clock in the evening. I had no reason to be 
suspicious, his note said; although I had no acquaintance of him, I could be certain that neither would I have cause to complain were I to come as he bade me do. Two  louis accompanied the letter, and despite my usual cautiousness, 
which ought certainly to have opposed my accepting the invitation of a man of whom I knew nothing, despite all that, I took the risk, trusting to I know not what intuition which, in a very low voice, told me I had nothing to fear. And 
so I went; and I arri ved at the given address. I am greeted by a valet who 
informs me that I am to undress entirely, for, he explains, it is only if I am 
naked that he can introduce me into his master’s apartment; I execute the 
order, and directly he sees me in the state desir ed, he takes me by the hand, and 
having led me through several intervening chambers, finally knocks upon a 
door. It opens, I enter, the valet withdraws, the door closes again; but, with 
what regards the amount of light in the room, there was precious little 
difference between that place and the inside of a hat, neither light nor air penetrated into that room from any opening whatever. No sooner am I in 
than a naked man comes up to me and seizes me without a word; I keep my 
wits about me, persuaded that the whole thing surely boiled down to nothing 
more than a little fuck to be shed by one means or another; that job once over 
with, I say to myself, I’ll be quits with this whole nocturnal ceremony. And so I 
waste not a moment placing my hand upon his groin, wi th the intention of 
draining the venom from the monster as rapidly as possible. I discover a very 
large prick, very hard and also very rebellious, but scarcely have I touched it 
than my fingers are forced away: my opponent seems not to want me to find 
out anything about him; I am edged toward a stool and made to sit down. The 
unknown libertine plumps himself down near me, and grasping my tits one 
after the other, he squeezes and wrings them so violently that I protest that he is hurting me. Wherewith his br utalities cease, he leads me to an elevated sofa, 
and has me stretch out flat upon it; then seating himself between my parted 
legs, he falls to doing to my buttocks what he has just left off doing to my 
breasts: he palpates and squeezes them with unparalleled violence, he spreads them, compresses them again, kneads them, mauls, kisses, and bites them, he 
sucks my asshole, and as these reiterated attacks were less dangerous on that 
side than they might have been on the other, I held my peace and put up no resistance, and as I let him toil over my hindquarters I wondered what could 
be the purpose of this mysteriousness when, after all, the things he was doing  
were perfectly ordinary. I was trying to guess what he was driving at when all of a sudden my man bega n to utter bloodcurdling shrieks:  
“Run for it, you damned whore, run for it, I tell you,” he shouted, “get out of 
here, bitch, for I’m discharging and won’t be held responsible for your life!”  
As you may readily imagine, my first movement was to leap to my  feet; I 
spied a feeble glimmer of light —it was coming through the doorway I had 
entered —I dashed toward it —ran into the valet who had received me at the 
door—flung myself into his arms …. He gave me back my clothes, also gave me 
two louis, I left the place  at once, very pleased to have got off so cheaply.  
“And you had excellent cause to congratulate yourself,” said Martaine, 
“for what you were exposed to was merely a diminutive version of his 
ordinary passion. I shall present the man to you again, Messieurs ,” that 
worldly dame continued, “but in a more dangerous aspect.”  
“I expect my characterization of him will be even darker,” said 
Desgranges, “and I wish to join Madame Martaine in assuring you that 
you were exceedingly fortunate to have had to put up with  no more than 
you did, for the same gentleman has far more unusual passions.”  
“But let us wait and hear his entire story before arguing the point,” the 
Duc suggested, “and, Duclos, make haste to tell us another so as to remove from our minds the image of a n individual who will unfailingly 
arouse us if we dwell any longer on him.”  
The libertine with whom next I came into contact,  Duclos went on, 
wished to have a woman who had a very handsome bust, and as that is one of 
my beauties, after having exposed it to  his scrutiny, he preferred me to any of 
my girls. But what use did that wretched libertine design to make of both my breasts and my face? He had me lie down, entirely naked, upon a divan, straddled my chest, deposited his prick between my dugs, ordered me to squeeze 
them together as tightly as I was able, and after a brief career, the wicked fellow inundated them with fuck while expectorating at least twenty 
mouthfuls of thick spittle, all of which landed on my face.  
“Well,” grumbled Adelaide, in whose fac e the Duc had just been 
spitting, “I fail to see any necessity for imitating that infamy. Are you 
done now?” she continued as she wiped her face. But the Duc had not 
discharged.  
“I’ll finish when it suits my convenience, sweet child,” the Duc replied 
to he r; “bear well in mind that, alive though you may be, you are only so 
in order to obey and to let be done to you what we please. Proceed with 
your story, Duclos, for I might do something worse and, adoring this 
beautiful creature as I do,” he said, resorting to a bit of persiflage, “I’d 
hardly wish entirely to outrage her.”  
I know not, Messieurs,  Duclos said as she resumed her discourse, 
whether you have ever heard tell of the Commander de Saint -Elme’s passion. 
He had a gaming house where all who came to ris k their money were deftly 
fleeced; but the most extraordinary part of it all was that cheating his visitors 
used to make the Commander’s prick stiffen: every time he’d pick someone’s 
pocket he’d discharge in his breeches, and a woman with whom I used to be  on the very best terms, and whom he had been keeping for a long time, once told 
me that sometimes the thing would heat him to such a point that he would be 
obliged to go to her to seek some relief from the ardor devouring him. He did 
not confine himself to robbing customers at roulette; every other kind of theft was just as attractive in his eyes, and no article was safe when he was in the 
vicinity. Were he to dine at your table, he would make off with the silverware; 
when he entered your study, he’d pilfer your jewels; if near your pocket, he’d appropriate your snuffbox or your handkerchief. Everything was subject to 
seizure: he took a keen interest in anything provided he could get his hands on 
it, and everything gave him a stout erection, and would even cause him to discharge once he had made it his own.  
But in that eccentricity of his he was certainly less outstanding than the 
parliamentary judge with whom I had to cope shortly after my arrival at Fournier’s establishment, and whom I had as  a client for many years: his being 
a rather ticklish case, he would deal with no one but me.  
The jurisconsult had a little apartment, which he rented the year round, 
looking out upon the place de Grève; an old servant lived as a caretaker in the 
apartment, and her only  duties were these two: to keep the premises in good 
order and to send word to her employer whenever preparations for an 
execution were visible upon the square. The judge would immediately get in touch with me, tell me to hold myself in readiness; he would  disguise himself 
and come to fetch me in a cab, and we would repair to his little apartment.  
In the salon the casement window was placed in such a manner it 
commanded a direct view of, and was situated near, the scaffold; we would 
post ourselves there, th e judge and I, behind a latticework screen upon one of 
whose horizontal slats he rested an excellent pair of opera glasses, and while 
waiting for the patient to make his appearance, Themis’ wise henchman 
would amuse himself upon a bed which had been drawn close to the window; while waiting, I say, he would kiss my ass, an episode which, by the by, 
pleased him enormously. Finally, the crowd’s hubbub would announce the 
victim’s arrival, the man of the gown would return to his place at the window 
and would hav e me take mine beside him, with the injunction to frig his prick 
gently, proportioning my strokes to the progress of the execution he was about 
to watch, in such sort that the sperm would not escape until the moment the 
patient rendered up his soul unto Go d. Everything was arranged, the criminal 
mounted upon the platform, the jurist contemplated him; the nearer the 
patient approached to death, the more furious became the villain’s prick in my 
hands. The axe was raised, the axe was brought down, ’twas  the in stant he 
discharged: “Ah, gentle Jesus!” he’d say, “double -fucked Christ! How I’d like to 
be the executioner myself, and how much better than that I’d swing the blade!”  
Moreover, his pleasures’ impressions would be measured by the method of 
execution, a ha nging produced in him little more than an exceedingly mild 
sensation, a man being broken on the wheel threw him into a delirium, but were the criminal to be either  burned alive or quartered, my client would 
swoon away from pleasure. Man or woman, it made n o difference to him . 
“I dare say,” he once remarked, “that only a pregnant woman would have a 
stronger effect upon me, and, unfortunately, the thing cannot be brought 
about.”  
“But, your honor,” I said to him upon another occasion, “through your public 
function you have cooperated in the destruction of this luckless victim.”  
“Assuredly, yes,” he replied, “and that precisely is what creates all the 
diversion for me; I have been judging for a good thirty years and have never pronounced any but the death sentence.”  
“And do you suppose,” I said, “that you have not, if only a little, to reproach 
yourself for the death of these people, which so resembles murder?”  “Splendid,” he murmured; “must one, however, look at the matter so 
closely?”  
“But in society such a thi ng is called a horror,” I protested.  
“Oh,” said he, “one has got to learn how to make the best of the horror; there 
is in horror matter to produce an erection, you see, and the reason therefor is 
quite simple: this thing, however frightful you wish to imag ine it, ceases to be 
horrible for you immediately it acquires the power to make you discharge; it is, 
hence, no longer horrible save in the eyes of others, but who is to assure me that 
the opinion of others, almost always erroneous or faulty in every other  
connection, is not equally so in this instance? There is nothing,” he pursued, 
“either fundamentally good, nor anything fundamentally evil; everything is 
relative, relative to our point of view, that is to say, to our manners, to our 
opinions, to our prej udices. This point once established, it is extremely possible 
that something, perfectly indifferent in itself, may indeed be distasteful in your 
eyes, but may be most delicious in mine; and immediately I find it pleasing, 
immediately I find it amusing, regardless of our inability to agree in assigning a character to it, should I not be a fool to deprive myself of it merely because 
you condemn it? Come, come, my dear Duclos, a man’s life is something of such 
slight importance that one may sport with it as mu ch as one likes, just as one 
might with a cat’s life or with that of a dog; ’tis  up to the feeble and weak to 
defend themselves, they have virtually the same weapons we possess. And since 
you are so scrupulous,” my man added, “my stars! what would you thin k of the 
fantasy of one of my friends!”  
And, with your Lordships’ leave, I shall terminate the evening by giving, 
as my fifth story, the account of the taste the judge related to me.  
This philosophical jurist told me that his friend would deal only with 
women scheduled to be executed. The nearer the moment that they are 
delivered to him borders on the moment they are going to perish, the better he pays for them. But he insists that the conference be held after they have been 
notified of their sentence. Than ks to his position in society within easy reach of 
this sort of prize, he never lets one slip through his fingers and,” my informant went on, “I have seen him pay up to one hundred  louis for this kind of tête -à-
tête. However, he does not carnally enjoy the m, or rather he requires nothing 
of them but that they exhibit their buttocks and shit before his eyes; for taste of shit, he maintains, there is nothing to equal what one gets from a woman who has just heard the death penalty pronounced against her. He wi ll go to any 
lengths to obtain these private interviews, and of course, as you may well suppose, he does not wish to be known by the victim. He sometimes passes himself off as the confessor, or at other times as a friend of the family, and his 
proposals ar e always fortified by the promise that, if they indulge his little 
whimsies, he may very possibly be able to be of help to them.  
“And when he has finished, when he has satisfied himself, by what, my dear 
Duclos,” said the judge, “do you fancy he concludes his operation? Just as do I, 
my worthy friend; he reserves his fuck for the climax, and releases it at last when before his delighted gaze the condemned person expires.”  
“Ah, that’s true villainy,” I told him.  
“Villainy?” he interrupted. “My dear child, al l that’s mere verbiage, prattle. 
Nothing’s villainous if it causes an erection, and the single crime that exists in 
this world is to refuse oneself anything that might produce a discharge.”  
“And so it was he refused himself nothing,” said Martaine; “Madame  
Desgranges and I shall have, or so I hope, occasion to entertain the company with several lubricious and criminal anecdotes relating to the 
same personage.”  
“Excellent,” said Curval, “for there’s a man I’m already hugely fond of. 
That’s just the way one s hould reason about one’s pleasures, and his 
philosophy pleases me infinitely. It is truly incredible the way man, already restricted in all his amusements, in all his faculties, seeks further 
to narrow the scope of his existence through his contemptible pr ejudices. 
For example, it is not commonly suspected what limitations he who has raised up murder as a crime has imposed upon all his delights; he has deprived himself of a hundred joys, each more delicious than the other, 
by daring to adopt the odious illu sion which founds that particular 
nonsense. What the devil difference can it make to Nature whether there 
are one, ten, twenty, five hundred more or fewer human beings on earth? 
Conquerors, heroes, tyrants —do they inhibit themselves by that absurd 
law? Do you hear them saying that we ought not do unto others that 
which unto ourselves we would not have done? Forsooth, my friends, I 
tell you frankly that I tremble, I groan when I hear fools dare to tell me 
that such is the law of Nature, etc …. Merciful Heaven ! all athirst for 
crimes and murders, ’tis  to see to it they are committed, to inspire them 
Nature has wrought her law, and the one commandment she graves deep in our hearts is to satisfy ourselves at no matter whose expense. But patience; I shall perhaps soon have a better occasion to expand upon 
these questions, I have made the profoundest study of them, and, in 
communicating my conclusions to you, I hope to convince you, as 
convinced am I, that the single way of serving Nature is blindly to 
respond to he r desires, of whatever kind they may be, because, for the 
sake of maintaining the divine balance she has struck universally, vice 
being quite as necessary to the general scheme as virtue, she is wont to 
urge us to do this, now to do that, depending upon wh at is at the 
moment necessary to her design. Yes, my friends, I shall someday discuss 
all that before you, but for the moment I must be still, for I have fuck 
that needs spilling, that devilish fellow at the executions has made my 
poor balls swell dreadfully.”  And the Président departed for the boudoir at the end of the corridor, 
with him went Desgranges and Fanchon, his two dear friends, for they 
were as great scoundrels as he; and with him also went Aline, Sophie, 
Hébé, Antinoüs, and Zéphyr. I have little  definite information upon 
what the libertine took it into his head to do in the midst of those seven 
persons, but his absence was prolonged and he was heard to shout: 
“Come, damn it, turn this way, do you hear? But that’s not what I told you to do” and ot her ill-humored  remarks interspersed with oaths to 
which he was known to be greatly addicted while enacting scenes of debauchery; the women finally returned, their faces very red, their hair very untidy, and with the air of having been furiously mauled and  pawed 
in every sense. Meanwhile, the Duc and his two friends had scarcely been marking time, but of their number only the Bishop had discharged, and in a manner so extraordinary that we had better say nothing about it 
at present.  
They went to the supper t able, where Curval philosophized a little 
more, for, with that man, passions had not the least influence upon doctrines; firm in his principles, he was just as much an atheist, an 
iconoclast, a criminal after having shed his fuck as when, before, he had 
been in a lubricious ferment, and that precisely is how all wise, level -
headed people should be. Never ought fuck be allowed to dictate or affect one’s principles; ’tis  for one’s principles to regulate one’s manner of 
shedding it. And whether one is stiff, o r whether one is not, one’s 
philosophy, acting independently of the passions, should always remain the same.  
The amusement at the orgies consisted in a verification which had not 
until then been undertaken, but which was interesting none the less: Messieur s were moved to decide who amongst the boys, who amongst the girls had the most beautiful ass. And so, first of all, they had the 
eight boys form a line: they were standing erect …yes, but, on the other 
hand, they were made to bend forward just a little, for that is the only way properly to judge an ass. The examination was both very long and very severe, opinions clashed, opinions were reversed, rectified, each ass 
was inspected fifteen times, and the apple was generally accorded to 
Zéphyr; it was unanimous ly agreed that it was physically impossible to 
find anything more perfect, better molded, better cleft.  
Next they turned to the girls, who adopted the same posture. 
Deliberation was at first very slow, very prolonged, it proved all but impossible to decide  from amongst Augustine, Zelmire, and Sophie. 
Augustine, taller, better made than the other two, would doubtless have triumphed had the jury been composed of painters; but libertines call rather for grace than exactitude, for fullness sooner than regularit y. 
There was in her disfavor a shade too much of the slender and of the delicate; the two other contestants offered a carnation so fresh, so healthy, so plump, buttocks so fair and so round, a back whose line 
descended so voluptuously, that Augustine was e liminated from further 
consideration. But how were they to decide between the two who 
remained? After ten rounds of balloting, opinion was still equally divided.  
At last, Zelmire won the prize; the two charming winners were 
assembled, were kissed, handled,  frigged for the rest of the evening, 
Zelmire was ordered to frig Zéphyr who, discharging like a musket, 
afforded, in the throes of pleasure, the most entrancing spectacle; then, 
in his turn, he frigged the young lady who all but fainted away in his 
arms, and all these scenes, of unspeakable lubricity, brought about the 
loss of the Duc’s fuck and of his brother’s, but only mildly stirred Curval and Durcet, who agreed that what they needed were scenes far 
less Arcadian, far less ethereal if their weary old s ouls were to be 
cheered, and that all these winsome frolickings were only good for youngsters. They went to bed, and Curval, plunged into the thick of fresh infamies, compensated himself for the tender pastorals he had 
been obliged to witness.    
THE TWENT Y-EIGHTH DAY  
’Twas  a wedding day, and the turn of Cupidon and Rosette to be united 
in holy matrimony, and by still another fateful combination of accidents, 
both were listed for punishment that evening. As no one was found at 
fault that morning, that entir e part of the day was devoted to the 
wedding ceremony, and when it was over, the newlyweds were brought 
into the salon to see what they would do together. The mysteries of 
Venus were, as we know, often celebrated in these children’s presence; 
although none  of them had so far taken an active part in them, they were 
well enough grounded in the theory of the thing to be able to execute 
about everything that there is to do. Cupidon, his prick very rigidly aloft, 
insinuated his little peg between Rosette’s thigh s, and she lent herself to 
his maneuvers with all the candor of the most thorough innocence; the 
young lad was managing so nicely that he was probably well on the way 
to success when the Bishop, taking him in his arms, had put in himself what, I fancy, the  child would greatly have liked to put into his little 
wife; all the while he perforated the Bishop’s ample hole, he regarded her with eyes which declared his regrets, but she was herself soon 
occupied: the Duc thigh- fucked her. Curval stepped up in the le wdest 
fashion to fondle the ass of the Bishop’s little fucker, and as that pretty 
little ass was found, in keeping with instructions, in the desired state, he 
licked it and began to stiffen. Durcet was up to the same tricks with the 
little girl the Duc was  holding with her chest pressed to his.  
However, no one discharged, and Messieurs went in to dine; the 
young bride and groom, who had been admitted to the table, also appeared to serve coffee, together with Augustine and Zélamir. And the voluptuous Augustine, deeply distressed over not having won the prize 
for beauty the night before, had, as though sulking, left her hair in just 
that kind of disarray which rendered her a thousand times more 
intriguing to see. Curval was stirred by the sight, and, examining  her 
buttocks:  
“I fail to understand how it happened that this little rascal did not win 
the palm,” said he, “for devil take me if in all the world there exists a finer ass than this one here.”  
So saying, he pried it open, and inquired of Augustine whether  she 
were ready to do her old friend a great kindness. “Oh, yes,” she replied, “a very great one indeed, for I really have to get rid of what I have there.” 
Curval rests her upon a sofa and, kneeling before that radiant behind, he 
devours its turd in a fla sh. 
“Sacred name of God,” says he, licking his lips, turning toward his 
colleagues, and pointing to the prick straining against his abdomen, “I’m in a state for furiously undertaking something or other.”  
“And what would it be?” asked the Duc, who was very fond of making 
the Président utter horrors when he was in that particular state.  
“What?” said Curval. “Why, whatever infamy you wish to propose, 
even were it to dismember Nature and unhinge the universe.”  
“Come along now,” said Durcet, upon seeing him cast  furious glances 
in the direction of Augustine, “come along, let’s go listen to Duclos, it’s story time. I’m persuaded,” he went on, addressing the others, “that if he 
gets the bit in his teeth, that poor little duckling is going to spend a 
trying quarter of an hour.”  
“Oh, yes!” said the inflamed Président, “a very trying one, I can vouch 
for that.”  “Curval,” said the Duc, whose prick was nodding in the air like a 
vengeful lance, and who had just finished eliciting some shit from 
Rosette, “let the others en trust the harem to the two of us, and two 
hours from now we’ll have turned in a capital performance.”  
Durcet and the Bishop, at the moment calmer than their co -
proprietors, each took one of them by the arm, and it was thus, that is to 
say, breeches about t heir ankles and pricks aloft, that those libertines 
made their solemn entrance into the auditorium, where the assembly was 
already gathered and ready to hear Duclos’ latest offerings; she, having 
anticipated, from those two gentlemen’s state, that she woul d soon be 
interrupted, began in these terms:  
A nobleman at the court, aged about thirty -five, came and asked me for one 
of the prettiest girls I could lay my hands on. He said nothing to indicate his favorite mania, and to satisfy any need he might have, I  gave him a young 
dressmaker who had never yet attended a party and who was incontestably one of the loveliest creatures France could boast. I introduce them to each other and, curious to observe what is about to transpire, I quickly repair to my post 
at the spy hole.  
“Now where in the devil has Madame Duclos been,” he opened by saying, 
“to find an ugly chit like yourself? Has she been raking over someone’s dung heap? You must have been servicing a couple of soldiers when they came to 
fetch you here.”  
And t he young lady, blushing to the ears with shame, for she had been 
forewarned of nothing, was at a loss to know what tack to take. 
“Well, get your clothes off then,” the courtier continued. “My God, but you’re 
a clumsy slut! I’ve seen ugly whores in my life,  but never one the likes of you, 
nor so stupid. Well, then? Are we going to be able to get this over with today? Ah, yes, there’s that body they’ve been praising to the skies. Sacred Mother, 
what are those dugs! you’d think they’d been grafted from an old cow.”  
And he fell to handling them brutally.  
“And this belly! What could have caused those wrinkles? You surely haven’t 
whelped twenty children at your age?”  
“Not one, Monsieur, I assure you.”  
“Oh, I see, not one, eh! That’s how all these bitches talk; lis ten to them a 
while and they’ll be trying to convince you they’re all virgins …. Well, move 
about, will you, turn around …infamous ass you’ve got dragging there. 
Flabby, disgusting buttocks —I understand now why they described you as 
unusual. It  must have tak en a lot of kicks in the ass to have arranged things 
this way.”  
And you will allow me, Messieurs, to remind you that the ass he was 
referring to was as beautiful an ass as one could find anywhere. Be that as it 
may, the girl began to grow upset; I could al most make out the flutterings of 
her little heart, and I saw her lovely eyes become worried, then misty. And the 
more troubled she became, the more energetically the scoundrel sought to 
mortify her. I cannot possibly remember all the ungenerous things he s aid to 
her; one would not dare say anything more stinging, more biting, to the vilest, 
most infamous of creatures. Finally, a lump welled up in her throat and her tears began to flow; ’twas  for this last development the libertine, who had been 
polluting hi mself with might and main, had reserved the bouquet of his 
litanies. ’Tis impossible, once again, to render for you all the horrible 
observations he made upon her skin, her figure, her features, the sickening odor 
he declared she exhaled, how he criticized  her bearing, her mind; in brief, he 
hunted up everything, he invented everything to humiliate her pride, and 
discharged all over her while vomiting atrocities a street sweeper would never 
dare utter. This scene had a most amusing outcome: the girl seemed to have taken it as a lesson, and it prompted her to take an oath; she swore never again 
to expose herself to such an adventure, and a week later I learned she had 
entered a convent for the rest of her life. I related this to the young man, who 
found it all prodigiously funny, and who later asked me for someone else to convert.  
Another,  Duclos continued, requested me to find him extremely sensitive 
girls who were awaiting news of an event whose unfavorable outcome might cause them an access of profoundest g rief. I had unending difficulty finding 
anything to answer this description, and it was virtually impossible to pawn off a makeshift upon the connoisseur. He knew what he was about, had been playing the game for ages, and one glance was sufficient to tell him whether 
the blow he was to strike would reach the mark. And so I made no effort to 
deceive him, and managed somehow always to get him girls who were in the mental state he desired. I one day produced a maid who was expecting word 
from Dijon of a young man she idolized and whose name was Valcourt. I 
presented the girl to the libertine.  
“Where do you come from, Mademoiselle?” he asked her in a decent and 
respectful tone.  
“From Dijon, Monsieur.” “From Dijon? Why, that’s a strange coincidence, for I have ju st this instant 
had a letter from Dijon containing tidings which have sore distressed me.”  
“And what is the trouble?” the girl asked with great interest; “I know 
everyone in the town, this news you have heard may be of some importance to 
me.” 
“Oh, not at a ll,” our man replied, “it relates only to me; it has to do with the 
death of a young man —I was keenly fond of him, he had just married a girl 
whom my brother, who also lives in Dijon, had found for him, a girl to whom he was passionately attached, and the day after the wedding, he suddenly 
died.”  
“His name, Monsieur, if you please?”  
“His name was Valcourt; he was originally from Paris,” and the libertine 
named the street and the number at which Valcourt had lived. “You cannot 
possibly have known him, though .” 
But the young girl had collapsed in a faint.  
Therewith our libertine, beside himself with delight, muttered a string of 
oaths, unbuttoned his breeches, and set to frigging himself upon her supine 
body. “Ah, by Christ! that’s what I want. Make haste now, hurry,” he said to 
himself, “the buttocks, I only need the buttocks to discharge.”  
And turning her over, and pulling up her skirts, he darts seven or eight jets 
of fuck upon the motionless girl’s ass, and then takes himself off without a thought either fo r the consequences of what he has said, or for what will become 
of the unhappy creature.  
“And did she croak as a result?” inquired Curval, who was being 
fucked at a great rate.  
“No,” Duclos admitted, “but she fell ill and lay six weeks at death’s 
door.”  
“Very fine stunt, oh my, yes!” said the Duc. “But,” that scoundrel went 
on, “I should have preferred it had your man chosen the period of her menstruation for his disclosure.”  
“Yes,” Curval said, “quite. But, Monsieur le Duc, tell us all the truth: 
your pric k’s in the air, I can sense it from here: you would have preferred 
that she drop dead on the spot.”  
“Well, have it your own way,” called back the Duc. “Since you’d wish 
it so, I consent, for, you know, I’ve not many scruples over a girl’s death.”  “Durcet,” said the Bishop, “if you don’t send those two rascals out to 
discharge, there’ll be a merry to -do this evening.”  
“Ah, by the Almighty’s balls,” Curval shouted toward the Bishop’s 
niche, “you’re afraid for your flock. But what difference would two more 
or two less make? Well, Monsieur le Duc, you’ve heard Monseigneur the 
Bishop’s suggestion, let’s go to the boudoir, but we’ll go together, for it’s all too evident these other gentlemen wish to avoid a scandal tonight.”  
No sooner said than done; and our two l ibertines had themselves 
followed by Zelmire, Augustine, Sophie, Colombe, Cupidon, Narcisse, Zélamir, Adonis, escorted by Bum -Cleaver, Invictus, Thérèse, Fanchon, 
Constance, and Julie. A brief interval ensued, then two or three women’s 
screams were heard, then the bellowings of our two lechers, who were 
disgorging their fuck simultaneously. Augustine reappeared dabbing at her bleeding nose, Adelaide’s breast was covered by a scarf. As for Julie, 
always libertine enough and clever enough to get through any o rdeal 
unscathed, she was laughing like one in hysterics and saying that had it 
not been for her they’d never have been able to discharge. The rest of the 
troupe returned; Zélamir and Adonis still had their buttocks smeared 
with fuck. Having assured their c onfreres they had conducted themselves 
with all possible decency and modesty, that they might have nothing to 
be reproached for, and that now, perfectly calm, they were in a fit state 
to listen, Messieurs gave Duclos the signal to proceed and she did so in 
the following terms:  
I sincerely regret Monsieur de Curval’s precipitate haste to relieve his needs,  
said that superb creature, for I had two pregnant -woman stories to tell him, 
and they would perhaps have afforded him some real pleasure. I know his taste 
for the fruit -laden, and I am certain that, had he a flicker of warmth left in 
his bowels, these two tales would divert him.  “Tell them all the same,” said Curval. “You are aware, I trust, that 
fucking has not the least effect upon my sentiments, and that  the 
moment when I am most infatuated with evil is always the moment after 
I have performed it.”  
Very well , said Duclos, I have seen a man whose mania was straitly 
connected with observing a woman give birth; he would frig himself when seeing her labor pai ns begin, and used to discharge squarely upon the infant’s 
head directly it hove into view . 
A second would perch a seven -month -pregnant woman upon an isolated 
pedestal at least fifteen feet high. She was obliged to keep her balance, and her 
mind on what sh e was about, for if by mischance she were to have grown 
dizzy, she and her issue would have been definitively ruined. The libertine I 
speak of, very little affected by the situation of the poor creature he paid for her acrobatic skill, kept her where she was until he had discharged, and frigged 
himself before her while exclaiming: “Ah, the lovely statue, the beautiful 
ornament, the empress upon her dais!”  
“Well, Curval, you’d have shaken that column, wouldn’t you, eh?” said 
the Duc.  
“Ah, not at all, you’re mistaken; I have too much respect for Nature 
and her works. Is not the most interesting of them all the propagation of 
our species? is it not a kind of miracle we ought to adore incessantly, and 
ought we not to have the warmest interest in those who perfor m it? For 
my part, I never see a pregnant woman without being melted; think for a moment what a marvelous thing is a woman who, just like an oven, can 
make a little snot hatch deep in her vagina. Is there anything more 
beautiful, anything quite as fetching  as that? Constance, dear girl, come hither, I beseech you, come let me kiss the sanctuary wherein, at this 
very moment, such a profound mystery is in progress.”  
And as he found her right there in his alcove, he was not long 
searching after the temple he w ished to minister to. But there is reason 
to suppose Constance took a somewhat different view of his intentions, 
or, at least, that she only half believed his professions, for an instant later 
she was heard to vent a scream which bore no relationship at all to the consequences of a reverence or an homage. Then silence closed again; 
observing that all lay quiet, Duclos concluded her narrations with the 
following little tale:  
I knew a man,  said she, whose passion consisted in hearing children wail 
and cry; he  had to have a mother with a child of no more than three or four. 
He required this mother to give her offspring a sound thrashing; it had to be done before him, and when the little creature, aroused by this treatment, began 
to bawl, the mother had next to catch hold of the rogue’s prick and frig it 
industriously, directing the glans at the child, in whose face he would discharge when the little one was singing his loudest.  
“Now, I wager,” the Bishop said to Curval, “that fellow was no more a 
friend of incre ase than you are.”  
“I dare say not,” Curval conceded. “He must be, according to the 
argument of a lady reputed to possess a great fund of wit, he must be, I say, a great scoundrel; for, in keeping with the development of her thought, any man who loves neit her animals, nor children, nor swollen-
bellied women, is a monster fit to be put on the rack. Well, by that 
agreeable old fool’s judgment, my case is heard and decided and writ off 
the agenda,” said the Président, “for I certainly have no affection for any  
one of those three things.”  And as it was late, and as interruptions had consumed a sizable 
portion of the séance, they went straight to supper. At table, they 
debated the following questions: what need has man for sensibility? and 
is it or is it not useful to his happiness? Curval proved that it was nothing if not dangerous, and that it was the first sentiment, this one of 
human kindness, one had to extirpate from children, by early making 
them grow accustomed to the most ferocious spectacles. Each of the m 
having differently approached the problem, by many and long detours 
they all finally ended up agreeing with Curval. Supper over, the Duc 
and he were of the opinion the women and youngsters should be sent to bed, and they proposed the orgies be made an en tirely masculine 
tournament; everyone concurred, the idea was adopted, Messieurs enchambered themselves with the eight fuckers and spent almost all the night having themselves fucked and drinking liqueurs. They stumbled 
to bed two hours before dawn, and th e morrow brought with it both 
events and stories the reader will perhaps find entertaining if he will 
give himself the trouble to read what follows.    
THE TWENTY -NINTH DAY  
There is a proverb —and what splendid things proverbs are —there is 
one, I say, which  maintains that the appetite is restored by eating. This 
proverb, coarse, nay, vulgar though it be, has none the less a very 
extensive significance: to wit, that, by dint of performing horrors, one’s 
desire to commit additional ones is whetted, and that th e more of them 
one commits, the more of them one desires.  
Well, such exactly was the case with our insatiable libertines. Through 
unpardonable harshness, through a detestable refinement of debauchery, 
they, as we know, had condemned their wives to render t hem the vilest 
and most unclean services upon their emergence from the privy. They 
were not content with that, and on the 29th of November they 
proclaimed a new law (which appeared to have been inspired by the 
previous night’s sodomistical libertinage), a new law, I say, which ruled 
that, as of the 1st of December, those wives would serve as the only pots 
to their masters’ needs, and that the said needs, both the greater and the 
lesser, would never be executed anywhere save in their wives’ mouths; 
that when ever Messieurs were moved to satisfy these fundamental urges, 
they would be followed about by four sultanas who would, once the urge 
had been satisfied, render them the service which heretofore the wives 
had rendered them and which the said wives would her eafter be unable 
to render them, since they were going to have graver employment; that the four officiating sultanas would be Colombe for Curval, Hébé for the 
Duc, Rosette for the Bishop, and Michette for Durcet; and that the least 
error or failure committ ed in the course of either of these operations, 
whether in the course of that involving the wives or in that other involving the four little girls, would be punished with prodigious 
severity.  
The poor women had no sooner learned of this new regulation than 
they wept and wrung their hands, unfortunately, it was all but in vain. It was however ordained that each wife would serve her husband, and 
Aline the Bishop, and that for this one operation Messieurs would not 
be allowed to exchange them. Two of the duennas were ordered to take turns presenting themselves for the same service, and the time for their 
rendering it was unalterably fixed at the hour Messieurs would depart 
the evening orgies; it was decided that Messieurs would at all times proceed to this ritu al in each other’s company, that while the elders were 
operating, the four sultanas, while waiting to give the service required of them, would make conspicuous display of their asses, and that the elders would move from one anus to the next, to press it, open it, and 
encourage it generally to function. This regulation promulgated, the 
friends proceeded that morning to administer the punishments which had not been distributed the night before because of the decision to 
perform the orgies with the assistance of men only.  
The operation was undertaken in the sultanas’ quarters; they were all 
eight taken care of, and after them came Adelaide, Aline, and Cupidon, who also were included upon the fatal list; the ceremony, with the details 
and all the protocol observ ed under such circumstances, dragged on for 
nearly four hours, at the end of which their Lordships descended to 
dinner, their heads swimming, especially Curval’s head, for he, 
prodigiously cherishing these exercises, never took part in them without 
the mos t definite erection. As for the Duc, he had discharged in the 
thick of the fray, and so had Durcet. This latter, who was beginning to 
develop a very mischievous libertine testiness toward his dear wife Adelaide, was unable to discipline her without shudder s of pleasure 
which ultimately loosened his seed.  
Dinner was, as usual, followed by coffee; Messieurs, disposed to have 
some neat little asses on hand, had appointed Zéphyr and Giton to serve 
the cups, and to these two might have added a large number of ot hers; 
but there was not one sultana whose ass was in anything like an appropriate state. In accordance with schedule, the coffee -serving team 
was rounded out by Colombe and Michette. Curval, examining 
Colombe’s ass, the bedaubed condition whereof, in part the Président’s 
own work, generated some singular desires in him, thrust his prick between her thighs from behind, while so doing fondling her buttocks 
vivaciously; now and again, as it moved to and fro, his engine, as if 
through maladdress, nudged up agai nst the dear little hole he would 
have given a kingdom to perforate. For a moment he studied it 
attentively.  
“O sacred God,” he said, turning to his friends, “I’ll pay the society 
two hundred louis on the spot for leave to fuck this ass.”  
Reason prevailed,  however, he kept a grip upon himself and did not 
even discharge. But the Bishop had Zéphyr discharge into his mouth 
and yielded up his own sanctified fuck as he swallowed that delicious child’s; Durcet had himself kicked in the ass by Giton, then had Gito n 
shit, and remained chaste. Messieurs removed to the auditorium, where 
each father, by an arrangement which was encountered rather frequently, 
had his daughter on his couch beside him; breeches lowered, they 
listened to our talented storyteller’s five tal es. 
It seemed as though, since the day I had so exactly executed Fournier’s pious 
will, happiness smiled ever more warmly upon my house,  said that 
distinguished whore. Never had I had so many wealthy acquaintances. The Benedictine prior, among my most fait hful clients, one day came to tell 
me that, having heard of a quite remarkable fantasy and having subsequently 
observed it performed by one of his friends who was wild about it, he had a 
powerful desire to enact it himself, and hence he asked me for a girl  well 
fledged with hair. I gave him a big creature of twenty -eight years who had 
veritable thickets both under the arms and upon her mound. “Splendid,” said the prior upon beholding the goods, “that’s just what I need.” And as he and I were very closely at tached to each other, as we had taken many a gay tumble 
together, he made no objections when I requested leave to watch him at work. He had the girl undress and half recline upon a couch, her arms extended above her head, and, armed with a sharp pair of sc issors he set to cropping the hair 
beneath her arms. Once he had clipped away every bit of it, he turned to her 
mound, and barbered it also, but so thoroughly that when he was done one would never have believed the least vestige of hair had ever grown on a ny of 
the areas he had worked over. The job done, he kissed the parts he’d shorn and spurted his fuck upon that hairless mound, in a perfect ecstasy over the fruit of his labor.  
Another required a doubtless much more bizarre ceremony: I am thinking 
now of the Duc de Florville; I was advised to bring him one of the most beautiful women I could find. A manservant welcomed us at the Duc’s 
mansion, and we entered by a side door.  
“We will now prepare this attractive creature,” the valet said to me; “for 
there ar e several adjustments to be made in order that she be in a state to 
amuse my Lord the Duc …come with me.”  
By way of detours and corridors equally somber and immense, we finally 
reached a lugubrious suite of rooms, lighted only by six tapers placed on the floor around a mattress covered with black satin; the entire room was hung in funereal stuffs, and the sight, as we entered, woke the worst apprehensions in 
us. 
“Calm your fears,” said our guide, “you will not suffer the least hurt; but be 
ready for anything ,” he added, speaking to the girl, “and above all see to it that 
you do everything I tell you.”  
He had her remove all her clothes, loosened her coiffure, and indicated she 
was to leave her hair, which was superb, to hang free. Next, he bade her lie 
down up on the mattress surrounded by tall candles, enjoined her to feign death 
and to be exceedingly careful, throughout the whole of the scene to follow, neither to stir nor breathe more deeply than she had to.  
“For if unhappily my master, who is going to imagin e you are really dead, 
perceives you are only pretending, he’ll be furious, will leave you at once, and surely will not pay you a  sou.”  
Directly he had placed the girl upon the pallet in the attitude of a corpse, he 
had her twist her mouth in such a way as  to give the impression of pain, her 
eyes too were to suggest she had died in agony; he scattered her tresses over her naked breast, lay a dagger beside her, and near her heart smeared chicken’s 
blood, painting a wound the size of one’s hand.  
“I repeat to you,” he said to the girl, “be not afraid, you have  nothing to say, 
nothing to do, you have simply to remain absolutely still and to draw your breath at the moments when you see he is farthest from you. And now, 
Madame,” the valet said to me, “we may withd raw from the room. Come 
with me, please; that you not be worried about your girl, I am going to place 
you where you will be able to hear and watch the entire scene.”  
We quit the room, leaving the girl, who was not without her misgivings, 
but whom the manse rvant’s speeches had reassured somewhat. He conducts me 
to a small chamber adjoining the apartment where the mystery is to be 
celebrated, and through a crack between two panels, over which the black material was hung, I could hear everything. To see was st ill easier, for the 
material was only crepe, I could distinguish objects on the other side quite as 
clearly as if I had been in the room itself.  
The valet drew the cord that rang a bell, that was the signal, and a few 
minutes later we saw a tall, thin, was ted man of about sixty enter upon the 
stage. Beneath a loose -flowing dressing robe of India taffeta he was completely 
naked. He halted upon coming through the doorway; I had best tell you now 
that the Duc, supposing he was absolutely alone, had not the fai ntest idea his 
actions were being observed.  
“Ah, what a beautiful corpse!” he exclaimed at once. “Death …’tis  beautiful 
to behold …. But, my God, what’s this!” said he upon catching sight of the 
blood, the knife. “It must have been an assassin …only a moment ago …ah, 
Great God, how stiff he must be now, the person who did that.”  
And, frigging himself:  
“How I would have loved to see him strike the blow !” 
And fondling the corpse, moving his hand over its belly : 
“Pregnant? …No, apparently not. What a pity .” 
And con tinuing to explore with his hands:  
“Superb flesh! It’s still warm …a lovely breast .” 
Wherewith he bent over her and kissed her mouth with incredible emotion:  
“Still drooling,” he said; “how I adore this saliva!” And once again he drove his tongue almost into her gullet; no one could 
possibly have played the role more convincingly than did that girl, she lay 
stock -still, and whenever the Duc drew near she ceased entirely to breathe. 
Finally, he rolled her over upon her stomach : 
“I must have a look at this lov ely ass,” he murmured.  
And after having scanned it : 
“Jesus Christ! What matchless buttocks!”  And then he opened them, kissed them, and we distinctly saw him place his 
tongue in that cunning little hole.  
“Oh, upon my word!” he cried, sweating with admiratio n, “this is certainly 
one of the most superb corpses I have ever seen in my life; happy he who took 
this girl’s life, oh, enviable person, what pleasure he must have known!”  
The very idea made him discharge; he was lying beside her, squeezing her, 
his thig hs glued against her buttocks, and he discharged upon her asshole, 
giving out unbelievable signs of pleasure, and, as he yielded his sperm, crying 
like a demon:  
“Ah fuck, fuck, ah good God, if only I had killed her, if only I had been the 
one!” 
Thus the op eration ended, the libertine rose and disappeared; we entered the 
room to resurrect our brave little friend. She was exhausted, unable to budge: 
constraint, fright, everything had numbed her senses, she was about ready in 
all earnestness to become the char acter she had just personified so expertly. We 
departed with four  louis the valet gave us; as you may well imagine, he 
doubtless surrendered no more than half of our pay.  
“Ye living gods!” cried Curval, “now that is a passion! To say the least, 
the thing h as flavor, aroma.”  
“I’m as stiff as a mule,” said the Duc; “I’ll stake my fortune on it, that 
fellow had other tricks up his sleeve.”  
“Right you are, my Lord,” said Martaine; “he now and again 
employed a greater realism. I think Madame Desgranges and I hav e 
evidence to prove it to you.”  
“And what the devil are you going to do while waiting?” Curval asked 
the Duc.  
“Don’t disturb me, don’t disturb me,” the Duc shouted, “I’m fucking 
my daughter, I’m pretending she’s dead.”  “Rascal,” Curval rejoined, “that make s two crimes in your head.”  
“Ah, by fuck,” said the Duc, “would that they were more real ….” 
And his impure seed burst into Julie’s vagina.  
“Well now, Duclos, what comes next? Go on with your stories,” said 
he as soon as he had finished his affair, “go on, my dear friend, don’t 
allow the Président to discharge, for I can hear him over there effecting 
an incestuous connection with his daughter; the funny little fellow is working up some evil ideas in his head; his parents have made me his 
tutor, they expect me to keep an eye on his behavior and I’d be distressed 
were it to become perverted.”  
“Too late,” said Curval, “too late, old man, I’m discharging; ah, Christ 
be doublefucked, ’tis  a pretty death.”  
And while encunting Adelaide, the scoundrel fancied to hims elf, as 
had the Duc, that he was fucking his murdered daughter; O incredible 
distraction of the mind of a libertine, who can naught hear, naught see, 
but he would imitate it that instant!  
“Duclos, you must indeed continue,” said the Bishop, “else I’ll be 
seduced by those bawdy fellows’ example, and in my present state I 
might carry things a good deal further than they.”  
Some time after that last adventure I went alone to the home of another 
libertine,  said Duclos, whose mania, more humiliating perhaps, was not 
however so saturnine. He receives me in a drawing room whose floor was 
covered with a very handsome rug. He bids me remove all I am wearing and 
then, having me get down on my hands and knees:  
“Let’s see,” says he, stroking and patting the heads of two great Danes lying 
on either side of his chair, “let’s see whether you are as nimble and quick as my dogs. Ready? Go get it!”  And with that he tosses some large roasted chestnuts on the floor; speaking to 
me as if I were an animal, he says: 
“Go fetch them !” 
I run on all fours after a chestnut, thinking it best to play the game with 
good humor and enter into the spirit of his eccentricity; I run along, I say, and 
endeavor to bring back the chestnuts, but the two dogs, also springing forward, 
outrun me, seize the chestnuts, and take them back to their master.  
“Well, you’re clearly in need of some practice before you’ll  be in good form,” 
said the gentleman; “it’s not, by chance, that you are afraid my dogs might bite you? Don’t worry yourself about them, my dear , they’ll do you no harm, but 
inwardly, you know, they’ll look down upon you if they see that you’re a 
clumsy creature. So let’s try again —try harder. Here’s your chance to get 
even …bring it back!”  
Another chestnut thrown, another victory carried off by the dogs, another 
defeat for me; well, to make a long story short, the game lasted two hours, 
during which I managed to get the chestnut only once and to bring it back in my mouth to him who had thrown it. But whether triumphant or bested, 
never did the dogs  do me any harm; on the contrary, they seemed to be having 
a good time playing and to be amused by me, quite as though I were a dog too.  
“That’s enough,” said the gentleman. “You’ve worked hard enough; it’s time 
to eat.”  
He rang, a servant entered.  
“Bring some food for my animals,” he said.  
And a moment later the servant returned, carrying an ebony feeding trough 
which was filled with a kind of very delicate chopped meat. He set the trough 
on the floor.  
“Very well,” my gentleman said to me, “get down and ea t with my dogs, 
and try to put on a better show while eating than you did while playing.”  There was nothing for me to reply; I had to obey. Still on all fours, I 
plunged my head into the trough; the trough was very clean, the food very 
good, I fell to munc hing away beside the dogs, which very politely moved over, 
leaving me peacefully to my share. And that was the critical instant for our 
libertine; the humiliation of a woman, the degradation to which he reduced 
her, wonderfully stimulated his spirits.  
“Oh,  the buggeress !” said he, frigging himself assiduously, “the tramp, look 
at her there, gorging herself with the dogs, that’s how one should deal with all 
women, and if they were to be handled thus, we’d have no more sauciness from 
them, ah, no! Domestic an imals like those dogs, why should they not be treated 
in the same way? Ah! impudent bitch that you are, whore, slime, scum!” he 
cried, stepping near and spraying his fuck over my bum, “ buggeress , I’ll have 
you eat with my dogs.”  
And that was the end of tha t; our man vanished, I dressed promptly, and 
lying by my mantelet I found two  louis, the current price and doubtless the one 
the rogue was accustomed to paying for his pleasures.  
At this point, Messieurs,  Duclos continued, I am obliged to retrace my 
steps and, by way of conclusion to the evening’s narrations, to recount two 
adventures I had during my youth. As they are somewhat on the strong side, 
they would have been out of place amidst the mild escapades with which you 
had me start at the beginning of the  month; and so I set them aside and kept 
them for the end of my contribution.  
I was only sixteen at the time, and was still with Madame Guérin; I had 
been sent to the home of a man of unchallenged distinction, and, upon 
arriving there, was simply told to wait in a small antechamber, told to be at 
my ease, told to be sure to obey the lord who would soon be coming to sport 
with me; but they were careful not to tell me anything else: I’d not have had 
such a fright if I’d been forewarned, and our libertine woul d certainly not have had as much pleasure. I had been in the room for about an hour when the 
door opened at last. It was the master of the house himself.  
“What the devil are you doing here,” he demanded with an air of surprise, 
“at this time of day? …What about it, whore!” he cries, seizing me by the 
throat and all but choking the breath out of me, “what about it! Has the slut 
come here to rob me?” 
He calls to someone, a trustworthy servant immediately appears.  
“La Fleur,” says his angry master, “I’ve got a thief here; she was hiding 
when I came in. Strip her and prepare to carry out the orders I give you.”  
La Fleur does as he is told, I am despoiled of my clothes in a trice, they are 
tossed aside as they are peeled off my body.  
“Very well,” the libertine says to his servant, “go find a sack, then sew this 
creature up inside it and toss her into the river.”  
The valet goes to find the sack. I leave it to you to wonder whether I did not 
take advantage of these few moments to cast myself at the nobleman’s feet and 
beg him to spare me, assuring him that it was Madame Guérin, his usual procuress, who had herself sent me to his house. But the lewd gentleman will 
have none of it, he grasps my two buttocks, and kneading them brutally 
between his fists:  
“Why, fuck my ey es,” says he, “I think I’ll feed this pretty ass to the fish.”  
That was the single lubricious action he seemed inclined to permit himself, 
and until then he had exposed nothing which might have led me to suppose 
libertinage had something to do with the sce ne. The valet returns, bringing a 
sack with him; despite all my protests, and they were heated, I am dumped into it, the mouth of the sack is sewn up, and La Fleur lifts me upon his 
shoulders. It was then I heard the effects of our libertine’s mounting cri sis; he 
had probably begun to frig himself as soon as I had been put in the sack. At the same instant La Fleur raised me to his shoulders, the villain’s fuck departed 
him. 
“Into the river, into the river, do you hear me, La Fleur?” he said, 
stammering with  pleasure. “Yes, into the river with her, and you’ll slip a stone 
into the sack, so that the whore will drown all the more quickly.”  
And that was all he had to say, I was borne out, we went into the adjacent 
room where La Fleur, having ripped open the sack , returned me my clothes, 
gave me two  louis, and also gave me some unequivocal proof of the manner, 
radically unlike his master’s, in which he conducted himself in the pursuit of happiness; then I returned to Guérin’s. I severely scolded Guérin for having sent me there so poorly prepared; to placate me, she arranged another party: it 
took place two days later, and I was even less well prepared for the battle I 
was to wage with this new foe.  
More or less as in the adventure I have just related, I was to go a nd wait in 
an antechamber of the apartment belonging to a farmer -general, but this time 
I waited in the company of the valet who, sent thither by his master, had come to fetch me at Guérin’s. To while away the time before my gentleman’s 
arrival, the valet diverted me by bringing out and displaying several precious 
stones kept in a desk drawer in the room.  
“Bless me,” said the good pander, “were you to take one or two of them I 
don’t fancy it would make much difference; the old Croesus is so damned rich I 
wager he doesn’t even know how many of ’ em or what kind he’s got here in his 
desk. Go right ahead, if you like, don’t bother yourself about me, I’m not the 
sort of fellow to betray a little friend.”  
Alas! I was only too well disposed to follow this perfidiou s advice; you know 
my predilections, I’ve told you about them; and so, without his having to say another word, I put my hand upon a little gold box worth seven or eight louis, 
not daring to make off with any more valuable object. That was all that rascal of a valet desired, and to avoid having to return to the matter later on, I 
afterward learned that, had I refused to take something, he would, without my 
being aware of it, have slipped a jewel or two into my pocket. The master 
arrives, greets me with kindn ess and courtesy, the valet leaves the room, we 
two remain there together. This man, unlike the other, amused himself in a 
very real sense; he scattered a profusion of kisses over my ass, had me flog him, 
fart in his mouth, he put his prick in mine, and in  one word had his fill of 
every kind and shape of lubricity save for that sometimes sought in the cunt; 
but ’twas  all to no purpose, he did not discharge. The propitious moment for 
that had not yet come, all this he had been doing was secondary, preparator y; 
you will soon see to what it was leading.  
“Why, my stars!” he suddenly exclaimed, “it had entirely slipped my mind. 
There’s a domestic still waiting in the other room for a gem I just a moment 
ago promised to give him for his master. Excuse me, my dear,  but I really must 
keep my word to him; then we’ll get back to work.”  
Guilty of the little larceny I’d just committed at the instigation of that 
accursed valet, you may well suppose that this remark made me tremble. I 
thought for an instant to stop him, co nfess to the theft, then I decided it would 
be better to play innocent and run the risk. He opens the desk, looks through 
first one drawer then the next, rummages about, and failing to find what he is after, he darts furious glances at me.  
“You, slut, you alone,” says he, “apart from a valet in whom I have entire 
confidence, you have been the only person to enter  this room during the past 
three hours; the article is missing; you must have taken it.”  
“Oh, Monsieur,” I say, shaking in every limb, “you may be sure I am 
incapable …” 
“Damn your eyes,” he roars (now, you will remark that his breeches were 
still unbuttoned, that his prick was protruding from them, that this prick held a very vertical slope; all this, you would suppose, ought to have enlightened me 
and dispelled my fears, but I had all but lost my head, and noticed nothing), 
“come along, buggeress , my valuable has got to be found.”  
He ordered me to strip; twenty times I besought him on bended knee to 
spare me the humiliation of such a search, he would  be moved by nothing, 
nothing melted him, he himself angrily tore off my clothes, and as soon as I was naked, he went through my pockets and, of course, it was not long before he came across the box.  
“Ah, you bitch!” he cried, “I need no more than that to be convinced. So, 
buggeress , you come to a man’s house to steal from him?” 
And immediately summoning his lieutenant:  
“Go bring an officer of the police at once,” he said.  
“Oh, Monsieur!” I cried, “have pity upon my youthful truancy, I have been 
beguiled in to this, ’twas  not done of my own will, I was told to …” 
“Well,” the lecherous gentleman interrupted, “you will explain all that to the 
officer, for I’ll be damned if I don’t mean to put a stop to all this crime.”  
The valet leaves again; the libertine, stil l wearing a blinding erection, 
flings himself into an armchair and while he fumbles about his crotch, he 
showers a thousand invectives upon me.  
“This tramp, this monster,” said he, “she comes to my house to rob me, I who 
wanted to give her the reward her s ervices deserve…ah, by God, we shall see.”  
As he utters these words a knock is heard at the door, and I see a gendarme 
enter.  
“Officer,” says the master of the premises, “I have a thieving wench here I 
wish to put in your safekeeping, and I turn her over to you naked, for I put her 
in that state in order to search her clothing; there is the girl, over there are her 
garments, and here is the stolen article; I urge you to have her hanged, officer, 
and good night to you .” Whereupon he reeled backward, sat down  in his chair, and discharged.  
“Yes, hang the bitch, by sweet Jesus, I want to see her hanged, officer, do you 
understand me? Hang her, that’s all I ask of you!” he fairly screamed.  
The pretended gendarme leads me away with my clothes and the damning 
box, takes me into a nearby room, removes his uniform, and reveals himself to 
be the same valet who received me and incited me to steal; so upset had I been, 
I’d not recognized him hitherto.  
“Well, well!” said he, “were you frightened?”  
“Alas,” I murmur, hardly  able to speak, “out of my very wits.”  
“It’s all over,” he said, “and here is your money.”  
So saying, he presents me with the same box I had stolen, ’tis  a gift from his 
master, he restores my clothes, to me, hands me a glass of brandy, and escorts me back  to Madame Guérin’s.  
“That’s an odd and pleasant mania,” the Bishop observed; “the major 
part of it can be extracted for use in other connections. My one criticism is that it contains an excess of delicacy; you know, of course, that I don’t greatly favor m ixing fine feelings with libertinage. Leave that element 
out of it, I say, and from that story one may learn the infallible method 
of preventing a whore from complaining, regardless of the iniquitous 
ways one might be disposed to take with her. One has onl y to proffer the 
bait, draw her into the trap, and when you’ve caught her red- handed, 
why then you are at liberty to do what you wish with her, there’s nothing 
more to fear, she won’t dare emit a peep for fear either of being accused 
or the object of your recriminations.”  
“It is indeed,” said Curval, “and I am sure that had I been in that 
gentleman’s place, I would have permitted myself to go somewhat further, and you, my dear Duclos, might not have got off so lightly.”  The stories having been long that eve ning, the supper hour arrived 
before Messieurs had the opportunity to indulge in any frolicking. They 
thus repaired to table firmly resolved to make the most of the period 
following the meal. It was then that, having assembled the entire household, they de cided to determine which of the little girls and boys 
could be justifiably ranked as mature men and women. To establish the critical facts, Messieurs thought best to frig everyone of the one sex and of the other about whom they had any doubts, or rather su spicions; 
amongst the women, they were sure of Augustine, Fanny, and Zelmire: these three charming little creatures, aged between fourteen and fifteen, all discharged in response to the lightest touch; Hébé and Michette, 
each being only twelve, were hardly  worth considering, and so it was 
simply a question of experimenting with Sophie, Colombe, and Rosette, 
the first of whom was fourteen, the latter two being thirteen years old.  
Amongst the boys, it was a matter of common knowledge that 
Zéphyr, Adonis, and Céladon shot their fuck like grown men; Giton 
and Narcisse were too young to bother putting through their paces; the 
abilities of Zélamir, Cupidon, and Hyacinthe remained to be 
ascertained. The friends formed a circle about a pile of well -stuffed 
pillows a rranged on the floor, Champville and Duclos were nominated 
for the pollutions; one, owing to her qualities as a tribade, was to act as 
the young girls’ fricatrice, the other, absolute mistress of the art of 
frigging the male member, was to pollute the thre e little lads. They 
entered the ring formed by the friends’ chairs and filled with pillows, and there Sophie, Colombe, Rosette, Zélamir, Cupidon, and Hyacinthe 
were turned over to Champville and Duclos; and each friend, the better 
to appreciate the spectac le, took a child between his thighs: the Duc 
appropriated Augustine, Curval had Zelmire to do his bidding, Durcet entrusted himself to Zéphyr’s skill, the Bishop favored Adonis to supply 
his needs.  
The ceremony began with the boys; Duclos, her breasts and ass 
uncovered, her sleeve rolled to the elbow, mobilized all her many talents and set to polluting each of those delicious Ganymedes one after the 
other. The human hand could not possibly have wandered and tugged, 
squeezed and patted more voluptuously; her  wrist, her fingers flew with a 
deftness …her movements were of a delicacy and of a willfulness …she 
offered those little boys her mouth, her breast, her ass, made all of herself available with such art that there could be no question but that they who were not finally to discharge had not yet the power to do so. 
Zélamir and Cupidon hardened, but all Duclos’ lore, all her agility, was 
quite in vain. With Hyacinthe, however, the storm burst after the sixth flick of the wrist: fuck leapt over Duclos’ breast, and the child went half 
out of his mind while fondling her ass. Messieurs were careful to observe 
that throughout the entire operation it had never once occurred to the lad to touch her in front.  
The girls’ turn came next; virtually naked, her hair very eleg antly 
arranged and equally stylish in every other part of herself, Champville 
did not look thirty years old, although she was fifty if a day. The 
lubricity of this operation, whence, as a thoroughgoing tribade, she 
expected to mine the greatest pleasure, a nimated her large dark- brown 
eyes which, since her youth, had always been extremely handsome. She 
put at least as much verve, daring, and brilliance into her actions as 
Duclos had into hers, she simultaneously polluted the clitoris, the 
entrance to the vag ina, and the asshole, but Nature developed nothing 
worthy of notice in Colombe and Rosette; there was not even the 
faintest appearance of pleasure in their expressions. But things were not thus with the beautiful Sophie: the tenth digital foray brought her  
fainting upon Champville’s breast; little broken sighs, little panting 
sounds, the tender shade of crimson which sprang into her lovely cheeks, 
her parted lips which grew moist, everything manifested the delirium whereinto Nature had hurled her, and she w as declared a woman. The 
Duc, his device as solid as a mace, ordered Champville to frig her a second time, and when she discharged afresh, the villain chose that moment to mix his impure fuck with that young virgin’s. As for Curval, 
he had wrought his fell deed between Zelmire’s thighs, and the two 
others theirs with the young boys they held locked between their legs.  
The company retired for the night, and the following morning 
having furnished no event which deserves to be cited in this catalogue 
of except ional feats, and dinner having furnished nothing, nor coffee, 
we shall remove at once to the auditorium, where the magnificently 
arrayed Duclos appears once again upon the platform, this time to end, 
with five new stories, the one hundred and fifty narrations which have been entrusted to her for the thirty days of the month of November.    
THE THIRTIETH DAY  
I am not sure, Messieurs,  said the beauteous storyteller, whether you have 
heard of the caprice, quite as unusual as dangerous, for which the Comte de 
Lernos is celebrated, but my several liaisons with him having afforded me a 
thorough acquaintance of his maneuvers, and as I found them most 
extraordinary indeed, I believe they ought to be included amongst the delights 
you have ordered me to detail. The Co mte de Lernos’ passion is to lead into 
evil as many girls and married women as he is able, and apart from the books he employs to seduce them, there is truly no sort of device he will not invent to deliver them up to men; he either exploits their secret yearnings by uniting 
them with the object upon whom they only think longingly, or he finds them 
lovers if such they are lacking. He has a house devoted to nothing else, and in it 
all the matches he has made are tested when the individuals concerned come to 
grips. He unites them, guarantees them freedom from intrusion, provides them 
with all the facilities needed for recreation, and then goes into an adjoining 
chamber to enjoy the pleasure of spying upon them while they are in action. 
But the point to which he  multiplies these disorders simply defies belief, nor 
would one credit an account of the immense number of obstacles he is willing to 
surmount in order to form these little marriages. He has associates in nearly 
every convent in Paris and amongst a vast qu antity of married women, and 
this army is led by a general of such great skill that not a day passes but at least 
three or four little skirmishes are fought in his house. Never does he fail to 
watch the voluptuous jousts —without the participants suspecting  his 
presence —but once he has gone to take up his observation post at the hole, as he 
stands watch all alone, no one knows how he proceeds to his discharge, nor what its character is; nothing but the fact is known, and that is all; I thought 
none the less that it was worthy of being mentioned to you.  
The fantasy of the elderly Président Desportes will perhaps prove more 
amusing to you. Fully informed of the etiquette observed at the home of this habitual debauchee, I arrive at his house toward ten o’clock i n the morning 
and, perfectly naked, I present my buttocks to be kissed; he is seated in an armchair, very grave, very solemn, and the first thing I do is fart in his face. My président is irritated, he gets to his feet, seizes a bundle of switches he has 
close at hand, and falls to pursuing me; my first impulse is to get out of his 
way. 
“Impudent hussy,” says he, chasing after me all the while, “I’ll teach you to 
come to my home to behave in this outrageous fashion.”  
I’m to flee, he’s to follow on my heels;  I finally gain a narrow alley, I take 
cover in an impregnable retreat, but, lo! there he is, he’s somehow managed to get at me. The président’s threats and imprecations redouble as he sees he has 
me trapped; he brandishes the switches, threatens to use th em upon me: I creep 
into a corner, cower there, put on a terrified air, I shrink to the size of a mouse; 
this terrified, groveling attitude of mine finally awakes his fuck, and the roué 
squirts it over my breasts while shouting with pleasure.  
“What! Do you  mean to say he didn’t give you a single lick with the 
switches?” the Duc demanded.  
“He didn’t bring them within a yard of me,” Duclos replied.  
“A very patient individual, that one,” Curval remarked; “my friends, I 
believe we all agree that we are somewhat  less so when we have in our 
hands the instrument Duclos mentions.”  
“But you need only a small amount of patience, Messieurs,” said 
Champville, “for I shall shortly present to you other samples of the same breed, but they’ll be rather less mild tempered th an Madame Duclos’ 
président.”  
And Duclos, observing that silence had succeeded these comments, 
saw she could continue with her stories, and proceeded in the following 
manner:  
Soon after this adventure had befallen me, I went to the town house of the 
Marqui s de Saint -Giraud, whose fantasy consisted in seating a naked woman 
upon a children’s swing and having her swing to a great height, back and 
forth. Each time you pass by his nose, he’s waiting for you, and you’ve got 
either to let fly a fart at him or expect a slap upon your ass. I did my best to 
satisfy him; I received several slaps, but also gave him some overpowering 
farts. And the Marquis having finally discharged after an hour of this 
monotonous and fatiguing ceremony, the swing was brought to a halt, and my audience came to an end. 
About three years after I had become the mistress of Fournier’s 
establishment, a man came to make an unusual proposal to me: he wished me to find libertines who would amuse themselves with his wife and daughter, 
the only con dition being that he be hidden in a place whence he could observe 
everything that transpired. Not only would whatever money I might earn 
from their employment be mine, but, he went on, he planned to give me an 
additional two  louis for every encounter I could arrange for them; and there 
was only one final condition to the bargain: for his wife’s partners he wished 
none but men of a certain taste, and for his daughter, men addicted to another 
kind of whimsy: his wife’s men were all to shit upon her breasts, a nd the 
procedure to be observed with his daughter involved having the men raise her 
skirts, broadly expose her behind in front of the hole through which he would 
be doing his spying, and then discharge into her mouth. He would surrender 
the merchandise for the said passions, but for no others. After having made this gentleman promise to accept all responsibility in the event his wife and 
daughter brought complaint for having been made to come to my house, I 
agreed to all he wanted and in my turn promised th at the two ladies would be 
furnished in strict accordance with his instructions. He arrived with his wares 
the very next day: madame was a woman of thirty -six, not very pretty, but 
tall and majestically formed, with a great air of sweet mildness and of modesty; her daughter was fifteen years old , blond, rather inclining toward 
heaviness, with the most tender, most winning countenance in all the 
world …. 
“Indeed, Monsieur,” quoth his wife, “you have us do strange things ….” 
“I know, my dear, I know,” said the lecher, “and it mortifies me, but so it 
must be. Accept your lot, do as you’re told, there’s nothing for it, I shall not give 
over. And if you balk in the slightest way at the propositions and the actions we are going to submit you to—you, Madame, and you, Mademoiselle —I 
shall tomorrow convey you to a place I know, and it is highly unlikely you’ll ever return alive from it.”  
Wherewith the wife shed a tear or two; as the man for whom I intended her 
was waiting, I requested her to pass without further delay i nto the chamber I 
had set aside for their bout; mademoiselle would remain in another room with 
one of my girls, she would be perfectly safe there and would be notified when 
her turn had come. At this cruel moment there were a few more tears, and it 
seemed clear to me that this was the first time the brutal husband had required 
such a thing of his wife; unhappily, her debut was arduous, for aside from the 
baroque taste of the individual to whom I was surrendering her, he was an 
imperious and brusque old libe rtine who would surely not treat her with any 
excess of courtesy or consideration.  
“That will do, no more tears,” said the husband. “Bear in mind that I am 
watching your conduct, and that if you do not give ample satisfaction to the thoughtful gentleman wh o is going to take you in hand, I will come in myself 
and force you to do his bidding.”  
She enters the arena, the husband and I go into the neighboring room from 
which we are to watch it all. It is difficult to imagine the point to which this 
old scoundrel ’s imagination was excited by contemplating his miserable wife 
being made a victim of some stranger’s brutality; he was thrilled by each thing she was forced to do; that poor humiliated woman’s modesty and candor beneath the atrocious assaults of the libertine engaged to exercise her, composed 
a delicious spectacle for her husband. But when he saw her thrown brutally to 
the floor, and when the old ape to whom I had delivered her shit upon her chest, and her husband saw the tears, beheld the horrified shudde rs of his wife 
as she first heard proposed and then saw this infamy executed, he could restrain himself no longer, and the hand with which I was frigging him was straightway soaked with fuck. This first scene ended at last, and if it had 
afforded him pleas ure, it was as nothing compared to the climax produced by 
the second. It was only with great difficulty, and above all with numerous and 
grave threats, that we succeeded in getting the young lady to enter the ring; she 
had witnessed her mother’s tears but knew nothing of what had been done to 
her. The poor little girl raised all kinds of objections; we finally helped her 
make up her mind. The man to whom I turned her over was fully instructed of 
all that was required to be done: he was one of my regular cli ents whom I 
delighted with this windfall and who, to express his gratitude, consented to all 
I prescribed.  
“Oh, the lovely ass!” cried the libertine father once his daughter’s stud 
displayed her entirely naked. “Oh, sacred Jesus, what adorable buttocks!”  
“Gracious!” I exclaimed, “am I to take it that this is the first time you have 
set eyes on them?”  “Yes, indeed it is,” said he, “I required this expedient to enjoy the spectacle; 
but if ’tis the first time I see that superb ass, you may rest assured it shal l not be 
the last.”  
I frigged him at a lively pace, he grew ecstatic; but when he saw the 
appalling things that young virgin was being forced to submit to, when he 
saw a consummate libertine’s hands straying over that extraordinary body 
which had never bef ore suffered such fondlings, when he saw her compelled to 
sink to her knees, open her mouth, when he saw a fat prick introduced into it, 
and saw that engine discharge inside, he tottered backward and, swearing like 
one possessed, shouting that he’d never i n his life tasted any pleasure as keen as 
this, he left certain proof of his statements between my fingers. Their 
adventure had drawn to a conclusion, the two poor women retreated, weeping 
abundant tears, and the husband, but too enthusiastic over the dram a they had 
enacted for him, doubtless found the means to persuade them to provide him 
with additional performances, for I received that family at my house for more 
than six years and, always following the orders the husband gave me, I made those two unlucky creatures acquainted with practically all the different 
passions I have mentioned in the course of my thirty days of storytelling; there 
were, to be sure, ten or twelve of the passions they had no opportunity to 
satisfy, because we did not practice them in my house.  
“Oh, yes,” said Curval, “there are many ways to prostitute a wife and a 
daughter. As if these bitches were made for anything else! Are they not 
born for our pleasures, and from that moment onward, must they not 
satisfy them at no matter what p rice? I’ve had a quantity of wives,” said 
the Président, “and three or four daughters of whom, thank God, I’ve 
only one left, and if I’m not mistaken Monsieur le Duc is fucking 
Mademoiselle Adelaide at this very instant; but had any one of those 
creatures ever balked at being prostituted, in any of the numerous manners of prostitution I regularly submitted them to, may I be damned 
alive or condemned never to fuck anything but cunts for the rest of my 
life—which is worse —if I’d not have blown their bloody br ains out.”  
“Président, your prick is in the air again,” said the Duc; “your fucking 
remarks always betray you.”  
“My prick in the air? No,” the Président said, “but I am on the verge 
of getting some shit from our dear little Sophie, and I have high hopes 
her delicious turd will precipitate something. Oh, upon my soul, even 
more than I’d suspected,” said Curval after he’d gobbled up the hash; “by the good God I’d like to fuck, I believe that my prick is taking on some consistency. Who from amongst you, Messie urs, would like to 
accompany me into the boudoir?”  
“I’d be honored,” said Durcet, dragging along Aline, whom he had 
been pawing steadily for an hour.  
And our two libertines, having summoned Augustine, Fanny, 
Colombe, Hébé, Zélamir, Adonis, Hyacinthe, and Cupidon, and enlisted Julie and two duennas, Martaine and Champville, Antinoüs and 
Hercule, absented themselves for half an hour, at the end of which they 
returned triumphant, each having yielded up their vital liquor to the 
sweetest excesses of crapulence and debauchery.  
“Move on,” Curval said to Duclos, “give us your final tale, dear friend. 
And if it manages to make this prick of mine dance up again, you shall 
be able to congratulate yourself upon having wrought a miracle, for in 
faith, it is at least a y ear since I’ve lost so much fuck at a single sitting. 
On the other hand, it is true that …” 
“Very well,” the Bishop interrupted, “that will do; if we listen to you, 
we will hear something much worse than the passion Duclos is likely to 
describe to us. And s o, since that would be to retreat from the stronger to the weaker, permit us to bid you be silent and to listen instead to our 
storyteller.”  
That gifted whore thereupon terminated her recitations with the 
following passion:  
The time has finally arrived, my  Lords, to relate the passion of the Marquis 
de Mesanges to whom, you will recall, I sold the daughter of the unfortunate shoemaker, Petignon, who perished in jail with his wife while I enjoyed the inheritance his mother had left for him. As ’twas  Lucile w ho satisfied him, you 
will allow me to place the story in her mouth.  
“I arrive at the Marquis’ mansion,” that charming girl told me, “at about 
ten o’clock in the morning. As soon as I enter, all the doors are shut.  
“‘What are you doing here, little bitch?’  says the Marquis, all afire. ‘Who 
gave you permission to disturb me?’  
“And since you gave me no prior warning of what was to happen, you may 
readily imagine how terrified I was by this reception.  
“‘Well, take off your clothes, be quick about it,’ the Marq uis continues. ‘Since 
I’ve got my hands on you, whore, you’ll not get out of here with your skin 
intact …indeed, you’re going to perish —your last minutes have arrived.’  
“I burst into tears, I fall down at the Marquis’ feet, but nothing would bend 
him. And a s I was not quick enough in undressing, he himself tore my clothes 
off, ripping them away by sheer force. But what truly petrified me was to see 
him throw them one after another into the fire.  
“‘You’ll have no further use for these,’ he muttered, casting e ach article into a 
large grate. ‘No further need for this mantelet , this dress, these stockings, this 
bodice, no,’ said he when all had been consumed, ‘all you’ll need now is a coffin.’  “And there I was, naked; the Marquis, who had never before seen me, 
contemplated my ass for a brief space, he uttered oaths as he fondled it, but he 
did not bring his lips near it.  
“‘Very well, whore,’ said he, ‘enough of this, you’re going to follow your 
clothes, I’m going to bind you to those andirons; yes, by fuck, yes indeed, by 
sweet Jesus, I’m going to burn you alive, you bitch, I’m going to have the 
pleasure of inhaling the aroma of your burning flesh.’  
“And so saying he falls half -unconscious into an armchair and discharges, 
darting his fuck upon the remnants of my bu rning clothes. He rings, a valet 
enters and then leads me out, and in another room I find a complete new outfit, clothes twice as fine as those he has incinerated.”  
That is the account of it I had from Lucile; it remains now to discover 
whether ’twas  for that or for worse he employed the girl I sold him.  
“For something far worse,” said Desgranges; “I am glad you have 
introduced the Marquis to their Lordships, for I believe I too shall have something to say about him.”  
“May it be, Madame,” Duclos said to Des granges, “and you, my 
amiable companions,” she added, speaking to her two other colleagues, 
“may it be that you speak with greater energy than have I, with livelier 
images, brighter diction, superior wit, and more persuasive eloquence. 
’Tis now your turn, I have done, and I would but beseech Messieurs to 
have the kindness to forgive me if I have perchance bored them in any 
wise, for there is an almost unavoidable monotony in the recital of such anecdotes; all compounded, fitted into the same framework, they  lose 
the luster that is theirs as independent happenings.  
With these words, the superb Duclos respectfully saluted the 
company, bowed, and descended from her throne; she next went from 
alcove to alcove and was generally applauded and caressed by all the friends. Supper was served, Duclos was invited to sit at the table, a favor 
which had never before been accorded to a woman. Her conversation 
was quite as agreeable as her storytelling had been, and by way of 
recompense for the pleasure she had given them, Messieurs named her 
to be the governor -general of the two harems, and the four friends also 
made the promise, in an aside, that no matter what the extreme treatment to which they might expose the women in the course of the sojourn, she would always be deal t with gently, and very certainly taken 
back with them to Paris, where the society would amply reward her for the trouble she had gone to in order to help Messieurs procure themselves a little good cheer. She, Curval, and the Duc so completely 
besotted the mselves at supper that they were practically incapacitated 
and barely managed, with the expense of much effort, to reach the 
orgies, which they soon left, allowing Durcet and the Bishop to carry on 
alone, and betook themselves to the remote boudoir; Champv ille, 
Antinoüs, Bum -Cleaver, Thérèse, and Louison accompanied them, and 
one may be perfectly confident that they uttered and had done to them at least as many horrors and infamies as, at their end, their two more 
sober friends were able to invent.  
Everyone  repaired to his bed at two in the morning, and ’twas  thus 
the month of November ended, thus came to a close the first phase of 
this lubricious and interesting holiday, for whose second part we will not keep the public waiting if to our consideration it ha s kindly 
received what we have chronicled so far.    
MISTAKES I HAVE MADE3 
I have been too explicit, not sufficiently reticent, about the chapel 
activities at the beginning; must not elaborate upon them until after the 
stories in which they are mentioned.  
Said too much about active and passive sodomy; conceal that until the 
stories have discussed it.  
I was wrong to have made Duclos react strongly to the death of her 
sister; that doesn’t sort with the rest of her character; change it.  
If I said Aline was a v irgin upon arrival at the château, that was an 
error: she isn’t, and could not be. The Bishop has depucelated her in 
every sector.  
And not having been able to reread all this, there must be a swarm of 
other mistakes.  
When later I put the text in final orde r, I must be particularly careful 
to have a notebook beside me at all times; I’ll have to put down very 
exact mention of each happening and each portrait as I write it; 
otherwise, I’ll get horribly confused because of the multitude of 
characters.  
For the S econd Part, begin with the assumption Augustine and 
Zéphyr are already sleeping in the Duc’s bedchamber in the First Part; 
likewise Adonis and Zelmire in Curval’s, Hyacinthe and Fanny in 
3 As Sade notes, the speed with which he wrote the final draft of The 120 Days, and 
because he was unable to reread and correct his manuscript, resulted in a number of 
minor discrepancies in dates, characters, and situations, which the careful reader will doubtless discover. N one the less, given the large cast of characters, and the 
complexity of rules and procedures, his accuracy of detail is remarkable. —Tr.                                           Durcet’s, Céladon and Sophie in the Bishop’s, even though none of 
them has been deflowered yet.    
PART THE SECOND  
THE 150 COMPLEX PASSIONS, OR THOSE 
BELONGING TO THE SECOND CLASS, 
COMPOSING THE THIRTY -ONE DAYS OF 
DECEMBER SPENT IN HEARING THE 
NARRATIONS OF MADAME CHAMPVILLE; 
INTERSPERSED AMONGST WH ICH ARE THE 
SCANDALOUS DOINGS AT THE CHÂTEAU 
DURING THAT MONTH; ALL BEING SET DOWN 
IN THE FORM OF A JOURNAL. ( DRAFT )   
THE 1ST OF DECEMBER : Champville assumes the task of storytelling 
and relates the one hundred and fifty following tales (the number of ea ch 
precedes the tale).  
1. Won’t depucelate any save those aged between three and seven, but only 
cuntishly. ’Tis he who deflowers Champville at the age of five.  
2. He ties a girl of nine in a curled -up position and depucelates her from 
behind.  
3. He wishes  to rape a girl of twelve or thirteen, and depucelates her while 
holding a pistol against her heart.  
4. He likes to frig a man upon a maiden’s cunt, he uses the fuck for pomade, 
and next encunts the maid while she is held by the man.  
5. He wishes to depuce late three girls in succession, one in the cradle, one at 
the age of five, the other at seven.  
THE 2ND. 6. He’ll not depucelate anyone who is not between nine years old 
and thirteen. His prick is enormous; four women are needed to hold the virgin. 
The same  individual Martaine speaks of, who only embuggers three -year-olds, 
the same hell -inspired individual.  
7. He has his valet depucelate the maid, aged ten to twelve, before his eyes, 
and during the operation touches them nowhere save upon the ass. He now 
fondles the girl’s, now the valet’s. Discharges upon the valet’s ass.  
8. He wishes to depucelate a girl destined to be married the following day.  
9. He wishes the marriage to be performed, and to depucelate the bride at 
some time between the hour of the mass and the moment the couple retires to 
bed. 10. He would have his valet, a very ingenious personage, go about 
marrying girls left and right and bring them to his master, who therewith 
fucks them, and next sells them to procuresses.  
THE 3RD. 11. He must be pr ovided with two sisters; he depucelates them.  
12. He marries the girl, depucelates her, but ’tis  all a fraud, the marriage is 
a fraud, once he’s fucked her, he leaves her.  
13. He will only fuck a maid, and then only immediately after another 
man has deflowered her while he has watched. He must have her cunt 
muddied up with sperm.  
14. This one depucelates with an artificial engine, very large, and, without 
introducing himself, discharges upon the hole he has cleared.  
15. He will have none but maids of rank a nd distinction and pays for them 
in accordance with their wealth. This individual proves to be the Duc, who 
will admit having depucelated more than fifteen hundred of them over a 
period of thirty years.  
THE 4TH. 16. He forces a brother to fuck his sister i n his presence, then 
fucks her afterward; he obliges both to shit beforehand.  
17. He forces a father to fuck his daughter after he has himself had her 
maidenhead. 
18. He brings his nine -year-old daughter to the brothel, and while she is 
held by a procuress , depucelates her. He has had twelve daughters; has had all 
twelve maidenheads.  
19. Must have virgins between the ages of thirty and forty to fuck.  
20. He will depucelate no one but nuns, and spends immense sums of money 
to get them; he fucks several.  ’Tis the evening of the 4th of December, at the orgies, the Duc 
depucelates Fanny, who is held by the four governesses and ministered 
by Duclos. He fucks her twice in a row, she faints, the second time he 
fucks her while she is unconscious.  
THE 5TH. To celebra te the fifth week’s festival, Hyacinthe and Fanny 
are joined in matrimony, the marriage is consummated very publicly.  
21. He would have the mother hold her daughter, he first fucks the mother, 
then depucelates the daughter while she is held by the mother. The same one 
Desgranges mentions on the 20th of February.  
22. He likes adultery only; one must locate women for him who are 
generally known to be virtuous and well behaved, he makes them disgusted with their husbands.  
23. He enjoys having the husband come himself to prostitute his wife and 
hold her while he fucks her. (Messieurs imitate that passion forthwith.)  
24. He places a married woman upon a bed, encunts her while that 
woman’s daughter, suspended above, presents him with her cunt to be licked; 
the nex t instant he effects a reversal and encunts the daughter while kissing 
the mother’s asshole. When he has done licking the daughter’s cunt, he has her piss; then he kisses the mother’s asshole and has her shit.  
25. He has four daughters, legitimate and wedd ed; he wishes to fuck all 
four: he makes all four of them conceive and bear children so as someday to have the pleasure of depucelating the children he has had by his daughters and whom their husbands suppose to be their own.  
Apropos of which the Duc recounts —but his anecdote cannot be 
numbered amongst the stories because, Messieurs being unable to 
duplicate it, it does not compose a passion—the Duc recounts, I say, that he once knew a man who fucked three children he had by his mother, 
amongst whom there w as a daughter whom he had marry his son, so 
that in fucking her he fucked his sister, his daughter and his daughter -
in-law, and thus he also constrained his son to fuck his own sister and 
mother -in-law. Curval recounts another unusual history, that of a 
brother and a sister who reached an agreement whereby each would 
surrender his children to the other: the sister had a boy and a girl, so did the brother. They mixed the pudding in such wise that sometimes they 
fucked their nephews, sometimes their own child ren, and sometimes 
their first cousins, or else the brothers and sister would fuck while the 
father and mother, that is to say, the brother and sister, fucked one 
another also.  
That evening, Fanny is surrendered cuntwardly to the assembly, but as 
the Bishop and Monsieur Durcet do not fuck cunts, she is only fucked 
by Curval and the Duc. Henceforth, she wears a small ribbon aslant, like 
a baldric, and after the loss of both her pucelages she will wear a very wide pink ribbon.  
THE 6TH. 26. He has himself frig ged while a woman is being frigged 
about the clitoris, and he wishes to discharge at the same time the girl does, but 
he discharges upon the buttocks of the man who frigs the girl.  
27. He kisses the asshole of one girl while a second girl frigs his ass and  a 
third girl his prick; they then exchange tasks, so that, when all is said and 
done, each of the three has her ass kissed, each frigs his prick, each frigs his ass. 
Farts are required of them all.  
28. He licks the cunt of one girl while fucking a second in the mouth and 
while his asshole is being licked by a third; then exchange of positions as above. The cunts must discharge, he swallows their balm.  29. He sucks a beshitted ass, has a tongue frig his own beshitted asshole, and 
frigs himself upon a beshit ted ass; the three girls then exchange positions.  
30. He has two girls frigged before his eyes, and alternately fucks the 
friggeresses from the rear, but in the cunt, while they continue with their 
sapphotizings . 
Zéphyr and Cupidon are upon that day discov ered in the act of 
frigging each other, but they have not yet had recourse to reciprocal embuggery; they are punished. Fanny is much encunted at the orgies.  
THE 7TH. 31. He would have an older girl introduce a younger girl to bad 
habits; the older must fri g her, give her wicked advice, and end up by holding 
her while he fucks her, whether virgin or not.  
32. He calls for four women; he fucks two of them orally, two cuntwardly, 
taking great care not to insert his prick in a mouth until after having first had it in a cunt. While all this is going on, he is closely followed by a fifth woman, 
who throughout frigs his asshole with a dildo.  
33. This libertine requires a dozen women, six young, six old and, if ’tis  
possible, six of them should be mothers and the other six their daughters. He pumps out their cunts, asses and mouths; when applying his lips to the cunt, he 
wants copious urine; when at the mouth, much saliva; when at the ass, 
abundant farts.  
34. He employs eight women to frig him; each of the eight must be situated 
in a different posture. (This had better be illustrated by a drawing.)  
35. Wishes to have three men and three women fucking each other in divers 
attitudes.  THE 8TH. 36. He forms twelve groups of two girls each; they are so 
arranged only their a sses are visible to him; all the rest of their bodies must be 
concealed from his sight. He frigs himself while studying all those buttocks.  
37. He has six couples simultaneously frig themselves in a room paneled 
with mirrors; each couple is composed of two girls frigging each other in 
various and equally lubricious postures. He is in the middle of the room, he 
regards both the couples and their reflections, and discharges in the middle of it all, having been frigged by an old woman. He has kissed the buttoc ks of every 
participant in this drama.  
38. He has four streetwalkers besot themselves with wine and then fight 
with each other while he looks on; and when they are thoroughly drunk, they 
one after another vomit into his mouth. He favors the oldest and ugli est 
women possible.  
39. He has a girl shit in his mouth, but does not eat her turd, and while the 
first girl is in action, a second sucks his prick and frigs his ass; while 
discharging, he shits into the hand of the girl who is socratizing him. The girls exchange places.  
40. He has a man shit into his mouth and eats while a little boy frigs him, 
then the man frigs him and he has the boy shit.  
That evening, at the orgies, Curval depucelates Michette, in front: she 
is held by the four duennas and ministered b y Duclos; this arrangement 
is the conventional one and is observed upon all occasions; therefore we 
will not allude to it again.  
THE 9TH. 41. He fucks one girl in her mouth just after having shitted into 
the same receptacle; a second girl is lying on top o f the first, with the first girl’s 
head between her thighs, and upon the face of the second girl a third girl drops a turd, and he, while thus fucking his own turd in the first girl’s mouth, eats 
the shit deposited by the third girl upon the second girl’s face, and then they 
alternate roles, in such wise that each girl enacts all three of them.  
42. Thirty girls pass through his hands during a given day, and he has 
them all shit into his mouth, consumes the turds of the three or four prettiest. 
He repeats th is party five times a week, which means that he sees 7800 girls a 
year. When Champville first encounters him, he is seventy years old and has 
been in business for fifty.  
43. He sees twelve girls every morning and swallows their dozen turds; he 
sees them al l at the same time.  
44. He places himself in a bathtub; thirty women come up one after another 
and piss and shit into it till it is full; he discharges while paddling about in all that. 
45. He shits in the presence of four women, requires them to watch and  
indeed help deliver him of his turd; next, he wishes them to divide it into equal parts and eat it; then each woman does a turd of her own. He mixes them and swallows the entire batter, but his shit -furnishers have got to be 
women of at least sixty. 
That evening Michette’s cunt is put at the disposal of the assembly; 
thereafter she wears the little sash.  
THE 10TH. 46. He has girls A and B shit. Then he forces B to eat A’s turd, 
and A to eat B’s. Then both A and B shit a second time; he eats both their 
turds. 
47. He requires a mother and her three daughters, and he eats the girls’ shit 
upon the mother’s ass, and the mother’s shit upon one daughter’s ass.  48. He obliges a daughter to shit into her mother’s mouth and to wipe her 
ass with her mother’s teats; ne xt, he eats the turd in the mother’s mouth, and 
afterward has the mother shit into her daughter’s mouth, whence, as before, he 
eats the turd.  
(It would perhaps be advisable to substitute a son and a mother, in 
order to create a contrast with 47.)  
49. He wi shes a father to eat his son’s turd, then he eats the father’s.  
50. He would have the brother shit in his sister’s cunt, and he eats the turd; 
the sister then must shit in her brother’s mouth. He eats this second turd, too.  
THE 11TH. 51. Champville announc es she is now going to speak of 
impieties, and makes mention of a man who wishes the whore, while frigging 
him, to pronounce dreadful blasphemies; in his turn he utters terrible ones. His 
amusement during their dialogue consists in kissing her ass; he does no more 
than that.  
52. He would have a girl come with him to a church, and frig him there, 
especially at the time the holy sacrament is exposed. He situates himself as near 
to the altar as possible, and fondles her ass while she performs her task.  
53. He goes to confession for the sole purpose of making his confessor’s prick 
rise aloft; he lists a quantity of infamous misdeeds, and frigs himself in the confessional all the while he speaks.  
54. He wishes the girl to go and make her confession, then fucks he r orally 
the moment she emerges from the confessional.  
55. He fucks a whore throughout a mass being said in his private chapel, 
and discharges when the Host is raised.  That evening, the Duc depucelates Sophie cuntwardly, and while 
doing so blasphemes considerably.  
THE 12TH. 56. He buys a confessor, who yields him his place; thus he is 
able to hear the young  pensionnaires’ confessions and to give them the worst 
possible advice while pardoning them their sins.  
57. He would have his daughter go to confess to a  monk he has previously 
bribed, and he is placed where he can overhear everything; but the monk 
demands that the penitent keep her skirts raised high while she catalogues her 
faults, and her ass posted within plain sight of the father: thus he is able to 
hear his daughter’s confession and contemplate her ass at the same time.  
58. Has mass celebrated for completely naked whores; while observing the 
spectacle, he frigs his prick upon another girl’s ass.  
59. He has his wife go to confess to a monk he has bought: the monk seduces 
the wife and fucks her in front of her husband, who is hidden. If the wife 
refuses, he emerges from hiding and helps the monk force her.  
On that day they celebrate the sixth week’s festival with the marriage 
of Céladon and Sophie, which  union is consummated, and in the 
evening Sophie’s cunt is put generally to use, and she dons the sash. 
Because of this event only four passions are recounted on the 12th.  
THE 13TH. 60. Fucks whores on the altar at the same moment mass is 
about to be said; they have their naked asses on the sacred stone.  
61. He has a naked girl sit astride and bend forward over a large crucifix; 
he fucks her cunt from behind while she is thus crouched down in such wise the 
head of Christ frigs her clitoris.  62. He farts and  has the whore fart in the chalice, he pisses thereinto and 
has her piss thereinto, he shits thereinto and has her shit thereinto, and finally 
he discharges into the chalice.  
63. He has a small boy shit upon the paten, and he eats this while the boy 
sucks him. 
64. He has two girls shit upon a crucifix, he shits thereupon when they have 
finished, and he is frigged against the three turds covering the idol’s face.  
THE 14TH. 65. He breaks up a crucifix, smashes several images of the 
Virgin and of the Eternal F ather, shits upon the debris and burns the whole 
mess. The same man has the mania of bringing a whore to hear the sermon 
and of having himself frigged while listening to the word of God.  
66. He takes communion and, the wafer still in his mouth, has four wh ores 
shit upon it.  
67. He has her go to communion and fucks her in the mouth when she 
returns.  
68. He interrupts a priest in the midst of saying mass in his private chapel, 
interrupts him, I say, in order to frig himself into the chalice, obliges the whore  
to frig the priest thereinto, and forces the latter to quaff the mead.  
(* Passion Number 69 omitted by Sade. —Tr.) 
70. He intervenes directly the Host is consecrated and forces the priest to 
fuck the whore with the Host.  
Upon this day Augustine and Zelmire  are found frigging together; 
they are both rigorously punished.  
THE 15TH. 71. He has the girl fart upon the Host, himself farts thereupon, 
and then swallows the Host while fucking the whore.  72. The same man who had himself nailed into a coffin —Duclos 
mentioned him —compels the whore to shit upon the Host; he also shits upon it 
and flings the whole affair into a privy.  
73. Frigs the whore’s clitoris with the Host, has her discharge upon it, then 
buries it in her cunt and fucks her, discharging upon it in hi s turn.  
74. Chops it up with a knife and has the crumbs rammed into his asshole.  
75. Has himself frigged and then discharges upon the Host and finally, 
when he is restored to perfect calm and after his fuck has flowed, feeds biscuit 
and all to a dog.  
The s ame evening, the Bishop consecrates a Host and Curval destroys 
Hébé’s maidenhead with it, he drives it into her cunt and discharges thereupon. Several others are consecrated, and the already depucelated 
sultanas are all fucked with Hosts.  
THE 16TH. Profana tion, Champville announces, lately the principal 
element in her stories, will from now on be no more than accessory, and what, to borrow the brothel term, are known as little ceremonies are going to provide the main ingredient in the following complex pass ions. 
She asks her auditors to remember that everything connected with that 
will be presented merely as secondary matter, but that the difference 
subsisting between her stories and the examples Duclos has given, is that 
Duclos always pictured a man with one woman, whereas she, 
Champville, will always show several women administering to a single man.  
76. He has himself flogged by one girl during mass, he fucks a second girl 
orally, and he discharges when the Host is elevated.  77. He has two women gently flog  his ass with a martinet; each woman 
bestows ten stripes, alternating them with asshole friggery.  
78. He has himself whipped by four different girls while farts are being 
launched into his mouth: the girls take turns, so that each will have had a 
chance bo th to whip and to fart.  
79. He has himself whipped by his wife while he fucks his daughter, next by 
his daughter while he fucks his wife; this is the same individual Duclos spoke of, the same man who prostituted his wife and daughter in her whorehouse.  
80. He has himself whipped simultaneously by two girls, one flogs the front 
of him, the other his rear, and when at last he has been well stimulated, he 
fucks one of them while the other plies the lash, then the second while the first 
flogs him.  
That same eve ning Hébé’s cunt is made available to the public, and 
she wears the little sash, not being entitled to the large one until she has lost both her pucelages.  
THE 17TH. 81. He has himself flogged while kissing a boy’s ass and while 
fucking a girl in the mouth , then he fucks the boy in the mouth while kissing 
the girl’s asshole, the while constantly receiving the lash from another girl, 
then he has the boy flog him, orally fucks the whore who’d been whipping him, 
and then has himself flogged by the girl whose a ss he had been kissing.  
82. He has himself whipped by an old woman, fucks an old man in the 
mouth, and has the daughter of this aged couple shit into his own mouth, then 
changes so that, ultimately, everyone takes his turn in each role.  
83. He has himself whipped while frigging himself and while discharging 
upon a crucifix propped up by a girl’s buttocks.  84. He has himself whipped while fucking a whore from the rear, using his 
prick to tamp a Host into her fundament.  
85. He passes an entire brothel in revi ew; he receives the lash from all the 
whores while kissing the madame’s asshole and receiving therefrom into his 
mouth both wind and rain and hailstones.  
THE 18TH. 86. He has himself whipped by teams of cab drivers and 
chimney sweeps who pass two at a time , one plying the lash, the other farting 
in his mouth; he employs ten or twelve in a morning.  
87. He has himself held by three girls, he gets down on hands and knees, a 
fourth girl mounts astride him and thrashes him; each member of the quartet takes her t urn mounting and flogging him.  
88. Naked, he puts himself in the midst of six girls; he is conscience -stricken, 
asks to be forgiven, casts himself down upon his knees. Each girl decrees a 
penance, and he is given one hundred strokes for each penance he ref uses to do: 
’tis the girl he refuses who whips him. Well, these penances are all exceedingly 
unpleasant: one would like to shit into his mouth; another have him lick up 
her spittle from the floor; a third is menstruating and would have him lick her 
cunt cl ean; the fourth hasn’t washed her feet, will he kindly lick between her 
toes; the fifth has snot awaiting his tongue, etc.  
89. Fifteen girls arrive in teams of three: one whips him, one sucks him, the 
other shits; then she who shitted, whips; she who sucke d, shits; she who 
whipped, sucks. And so he proceeds till he has had done with all fifteen; he sees 
nothing, heeds nothing, is wild with joy: a procuress is in charge of the game. 
He renews this party six times each week.  
(This one is truly charming and ha s my infinite recommendation; the 
thing has got to move very briskly along, each girl must bestow twenty -five strokes of the whip, and it is between whippings that the first sucks 
and the third shits. If you would prefer fifty strokes from each girl, that 
will total up to seven hundred fifty, a very agreeable figure, not by any 
means excessive.)  
90. Twenty -five whores soften up his ass with a quantity of slaps and 
fondlings; he is not sent away until his ass has become completely insensible.  
That evening th e Duc is flogged while culling Zelmire’s forward 
maidenhead.  
THE 19TH. 91. He has himself tried by a jury of six whores; each knows the 
role she is to play. He is sentenced to be hanged. And hanged he is; but the cord snaps: ’tis the instant he discharges.  (Relate this to similar ones Duclos 
described.)  
92. He arranges six old women in a semicircle; while three young whores 
lash him, the six crones spit in his face.  
93. A girl frigs his asshole with the handle of a cat -o’-nine-tails, a second 
girl whips his  thighs and prick from the front; ’tis  thus he is made eventually to 
discharge over the tits of the whipper posted before him.  
94. Two women flay him with bulls’ pizzles while a third, kneeling before 
him, causes him to discharge upon her breasts.  
She reco unts only four that day because of the marriage of Zelmire 
and Adonis which marks the seventh week’s conclusion, and which is consummated, Zelmire having been depucelated, with what regards the 
cunt, the night before.  THE 20TH. 95. He struggles with six wo men, the cuts of whose whips he 
pretends to wish to avoid; he strives to snatch the whips from their hands, but 
they are too strong for him and fustigate him none the less. He is naked.  
96. He runs the gantlet between two ranks each of twelve girls who are  
wielding switches; he is whipped all about the body and discharges after the ninth race.  
97. He has the soles of his feet whipped, then his prick, then his thighs 
while, as he lies upon a couch, three women successively mount astride him and shit in his mouth.  
98. Three girls alternately flog him, one with a martinet, one with a bull’s 
pizzle, the other with a cat -o’-nine-tails. A fourth, kneeling before him and 
whose asshole the lecher’s lackey is frigging, sucks the master’s prick while 
frigging the lack ey’s, which he has discharge upon his sucker’s buttocks.  
99. He is amidst six girls: one pricks him with a needle, the second uses 
pincers on him, the third burns him, the fourth bites him, the fifth scratches him, the sixth flagellates him. All that every where upon his body, 
indiscriminately. He discharges in the thick of this activity.  
That evening Zelmire, depucelated on the 18th of December, is 
surrendered cuntwardly to the assembly —to, that is to say, Curval and 
the Duc, who alone of the four friends fuck cunts. Once Curval has 
fucked Zelmire, his hatred for Adelaide and Constance redoubles; he 
wishes to have Constance minister to Zelmire.  
THE 21ST. 100. He has himself frigged by his lackey while the girl, naked, 
balances upon a narrow pedestal; all the  while he is being frigged, she may 
neither budge nor lose her equilibrium.  101. He has the procuress frig him while he fondles her buttocks; and 
meanwhile, between her fingers, the girl holds a very short candle which she 
must not drop until the roué has spat out his fuck; he is very careful not to 
discharge before the girl’s fingers have been seared.  
102. He sups at an immense table; for light, he has six burning candles, 
each inserted in the ass of a naked girl lying upon the dining table.  
103. While he takes his supper he has a girl kneel on sharp pebbles, and if in 
the course of the entire meal she stirs, she is not paid. Above her are two tilted 
candles whence hot tallow spills upon her bare back and breasts. She need but 
make the slightest movement and she is packed off without being paid a  sou. 
104. He obliges her to remain four days in a very narrow iron cage, 
wherein she can neither sit nor lie down; he feeds her through the bars. He is the one Desgranges will mention in connection with the turkey’s  ballet.  
That same evening, Curval depucelates Colombe’s cunt.  
THE 22ND. 105. He wraps a girl and a cat in a large blanket, has her 
stand and dance about; the cat bites, scratches her as she falls to the floor; but, come what may, she must skip and leap, and continue her antics until the man 
discharges.  
106. He massages a woman with a certain substance which causes her skin 
to itch so violently that she scratches herself till her blood flows; he watches her at work, frigging himself the while.  
107. He gives  a woman a potion to drink, it halts her menstruating, and 
thus he makes her run the risk of grave illness.  
108. He makes her swallow a medicine intended for horses, it causes her 
horrible gripes and colics; he watches her suffer and shit all day long.  109. He rubs a naked girl with honey, then binds her to a column and 
releases upon her a swarm of large flies.  
That same evening, Colombe’s cunt is put at the free disposition of 
the company.  
THE 23RD. 110. He places the girl upon a pivot which revolves with 
prodigious speed. She is naked and bound and turns until he discharges.  
111. He keeps a girl suspended head downward until he discharges.  
112. Makes her swallow a heavy dose of emetic, persuades her she has been 
poisoned, and frigs himself while watching h er vomit.  
113. Kneads and mauls her breasts until they are entirely black and blue.  
114. Kneads and maltreats her ass for three hours; he repeats this rite for 
nine days in succession.  
THE 24TH. 115. He has a girl climb a tall ladder until she is at least 
twenty feet above the ground, at which point a rung cracks and she falls, but 
upon mattresses prepared in advance; he walks up to her and discharges upon 
her body the very moment she lands, and sometimes he chooses this instant to 
fuck her.  
116. He slaps a  girl’s face with all his strength and discharges while so 
doing; he is seated in a comfortable chair and the girl is upon her knees, facing 
him. 
117. Beats her knuckles with hickory ferrules.  
118. Powerful slaps upon her buttocks until her behind is scarlet.  
119. Inserts the nozzle of a bellows in her asshole; he inflates her.  120. He introduces an enema of almost boiling water into her bowels, then 
amuses himself observing her writhe, and discharges upon her ass.  
That evening, Aline’s ass is soundly slapp ed by the four colleagues, 
who keep it up until her ass is crimson; a duenna holds her by the 
shoulders. A few slaps are bestowed upon Augustine’s ass, too.  
THE 25TH. 121. He has some pious women recruited for his pleasure, beats 
them with a crucifix and r osaries, and then has each of them pose as a statue of 
the Virgin upon an altar, but pose in a cramped position from which they are 
not to budge. They must remain thus throughout an exceedingly long mass; 
when at last the Elevation occurs, each woman is to  shit upon the Host.  
122. Has her run naked about a garden at night, the season is winter, the 
weather freezing; here and there are stretched cords upon which she trips and falls. 
123. When she has removed all her clothes, he casts her, as if by accident, 
into a vat of nearly boiling water and prevents her from climbing out until he has first discharged upon her body.  
124. Naked, on a wintry day she is secured to a post in the middle of a 
garden and there she remains until she has repeated five Pater Noster s and 
five Hail Marys, or until he has yielded his fuck, which another girl excites to flow as he contemplates the spectacle.  
125. He spreads a powerful glue upon the rim of a privy seat and sends the 
girl in to shit; directly she sits down, her ass is cau ght fast. Meanwhile, from 
the other side a small charcoal brazier is introduced beneath her ass. Scorched, 
she leaps up, leaving an almost perfect circle of skin behind her.  
That evening profane tricks are played at the expense of Adelaide and 
Sophie, the two believers, and the Duc depucelates Augustine, of whom he has been passionately fond for weeks; thrice he discharges into her 
cunt. And that same evening the idea enters his head to have her run 
naked through the courtyard, dreadful though the weather be. He 
proposes the idea with great energy and in forceful language, but his confreres regretfully reject it, saying that Augustine is very pretty and 
that the program calls for her further use; and, the Bishop points out, 
she still has not been depucelated  aft. The Duc offers to pay two 
hundred louis into the common fund if the society will allow him to take 
her down into the cellars at once; he is again refused. He wishes at least that she have her ass spanked; she receives twenty- five blows from each 
friend. But the Duc applies his with his fist and discharges a fourth time 
between the eighteenth and nineteenth. He requisitions her for his bed and that night encunts her thrice again.  
THE 26TH. 126. He gets the girl thoroughly drunk, she lies down to sleep.  
While asleep, her bed is raised. Toward the middle of the night, she reaches down for her chamber pot; not finding it within reach, she gropes further and 
tumbles out upon a mattress; the man awaits her there and fucks her as soon as 
she has fallen.  
127. He has her run naked about the garden, he follows after her, 
brandishing a cabman’s whip, but only threatens her with it. She is obliged to 
run until she falls from weariness; at which instant he springs upon her and 
fucks her.  
128. He bestows one hundred strokes, ten at a time, with a martinet of 
black silk; between each series of blows, he kisses the girl’s ass with great fervor.  
129. He flogs her with a cat- o’-nine-tails whose thongs have been steeped 
in brandy, and does not discharge until the girl’s blood is flowing. Then he 
discharges upon her buttocks.  Champville recounts only four passions on the 26th of December 
because it is the day of the eighth week’s festival. It is celebrated by the 
marriage of Zéphyr and Augustine, both of whom belong to the D uc 
and lie at night in his chamber; but prior to the ceremony, His Grace 
would have Curval flog the boy while he, Blangis, flogs the girl; and ’tis  
done. Each receives a hundred lashes, but the Duc, more than ever aroused by Augustine because she has made him discharge frequently, 
lays on very emphatically and is content with nothing short of much 
blood.  
In connection with that evening’s entertainments, we must fully 
explain the character of the Saturday punishments —how they are meted 
out and how many lashe s are distributed. You might draw up a list 
itemizing the crimes and, to the right, the appropriate number of lashes.  
THE 27TH. 130. He likes to whip none but little girls between the ages of 
five and seven, and always finds a pretext so as to make it appear as if he were 
punishing them.  
131. A woman comes to confess to him, he is a priest; she recites all her sins, 
and by way of penance, he gives her five hundred lashes.  
132. He receives four women and gives each six hundred lashes.  
133. He has the same ceremony performed in his presence by two valets, one 
relieving the other when his arm is fatigued by the whipping; twenty women are dealt with, each merits six hundred strokes: the women are not bound. He 
frigs himself while the work is in progress.  
134. He flogs only boys aged from fourteen to sixteen, and he has them 
discharge into his mouth afterward. Each is warmed by one hundred lashes; he 
always sees two at a sitting.  Augustine’s cunt is surrendered that evening; Curval encunts her 
twice and, like the Duc, wishes to whip her when he has had done with 
her. Both gentlemen fall upon that charming girl like ravenous beasts; 
they propose a contribution of four hundred louis  to the common fund in 
exchange for permission to take her in hand together that same evening; 
their offer is rejected.  
THE 28TH. 135. He has a naked girl enter a chamber; whereupon two men 
fall upon her and each whips one of her buttocks until it is raw. She is bound. 
When ’tis over, he frigs the men’s pricks upon the whore’s bleeding ass,  and 
frigs himself thereupon also.  
136. She is bound hand and foot to the wall. Facing her, and also attached 
to the wall, is a blade of steel adjusted to the height of her belly. If she strives to 
avoid a blow, it is forward she must lunge; she cuts herse lf. If she wishes to 
avoid the blade, she must fling herself backward toward the lash. 
137. He flogs a girl, giving her one hundred lashes the first day, two 
hundred the second, four hundred the third, etc., etc., and ceases on the ninth day. 
138. He has t he whore descend on all fours, climbs upon her back and faces 
her buttocks; he squeezes his legs tight about her ribs. Once in the saddle, he brings his lash down upon her ass and curls the thongs round to her cunt, and 
as for this operation he employs a m artinet, he has no trouble directing his 
blows so that they carry into the vagina’s interior, and that is just what he 
does. 
139. He must have a pregnant woman, he has her bend backward over a 
cylinder which supports her back. Her head, on the other side o f the cylinder, 
rests upon the seat of a chair and is secured to it; her hair is strewn about, her 
legs tied as far apart as possible and her swollen belly appears stretched exceedingly taut; her cunt fairly yawns in his face. ’Tis  upon her belly he beats 
a tattoo, and when his whip has brought a profusion of blood into sight, he 
walks round to the other side of the cylinder and discharges upon her face.  
N.B. —According to my notes, the adoptions do not occur until after 
defloration, hence say that the Duc adopts Augustine at this point. Verify whether or not this is true, and whether the adoption of the four 
sultanas does not occur at the very beginning, and whether at the beginning it is not said that they sleep in the bedrooms of the friends 
who have adopt ed them.  
That evening, the Duc repudiates Constance, who therewith falls into 
the greatest discredit; however, they treat her with some consideration, 
because of her pregnancy, in connection with which Messieurs have 
certain plans. Augustine now passes for  the Duc’s wife, and hereafter 
performs none but a wife’s functions upon the sofa and in the chapel. 
Constance descends in rank to below that of the governesses.  
THE 29TH. 140. He works exclusively with girls of fifteen, and he flogs 
them with sting nettle s and holly until they are bleeding; his taste in asses is 
highly developed, he is not easy to please.  
141. Flogs only with a bull’s pizzle, continuing until the buttocks are in 
tatters; he uses four women one after another.  
142. Flogs only with steel -tipped martinets, discharges only when blood is 
flowing generally.  
143. The same man of whom Desgranges will speak on the 20th of 
February requires pregnant women; he flogs with a bullwhip, by means of 
which he is able to remove respectable chunks of flesh fro m the buttocks; from 
time to time he aims a blow or two at her belly. Rosette is flogged that evening, and Curval has her forward 
maidenhead. The intrigue between Hercule and Julie is brought to light; 
she has been having herself fucked. When scolded for h er misbehavior, 
she replies libertinely; she is therewith whipped extraordinarily. Then, 
because Messieurs are fond of her, and also of Hercule, who has given 
yeoman service so far, they are pardoned and frolicked with.  
THE 30TH. 144. He places a candle at a certain height. Attached to the 
middle finger of her right hand is a piece of bread soaked in wax and set afire; 
if she does not make haste, she’ll be burned. Her task is, with this bit of ignited 
bread, to light the other candle set high upon the shelf ; she is obliged to leap in 
order to reach it; the libertine, armed with a leathern -thonged whip, lashes her 
with all his strength, to encourage her to leap higher and to light the candle 
more quickly. If she succeeds, there’s an end to the game; if not, s he is flogged 
till she falls unconscious.  
145. He flogs first his wife, then his daughter, and prostitutes them at the 
brothel in order to have them whipped while he looks on, but this is not the same man of whom we have already spoken.  
146. Whips with a c at-o’-nine-tails, from the nape of the neck to the calves 
of the legs; the girl is bound, he excoriates her entire back.  
147. Whips breasts only; he insists that they be exceedingly large. And pays 
twice the sum when the woman is pregnant.  
Rosette’s cunt is delivered up to the society that evening; after Curval 
and the Duc have thoroughly fucked it, they and their colleagues 
thoroughly whip it. She is down on her hands and knees; Messieurs take 
care to drive the martinet’s steel tips well up into her.  THE 31ST. 148. He whips the face only, using a bundle of dry switches; he 
must have charming faces. Desgranges will refer to him on the 7th of 
February.  
149. Using switches, he impartially lashes the entire body, sparing nothing, 
face, cunt, and breasts include d. 
150. Gives two hundred blows of the bull’s pizzle, these being distributed 
evenly up and down the backs of lads aged from sixteen to twenty.  
151. He is in a room, four girls arouse and flog him; when at last he is all 
afire, he leaps upon a fifth girl, who is naked and awaiting him in the next 
room and, wielding a bull’s pizzle, he assails whatever of her he can reach, 
maintaining the hail of blows until he discharges; but in order that his 
ejaculation arrive sooner and the patient suffer less, he is not  sent into the 
second room until his discharge is imminent.  
(Find out why there is one too many.)  
Champville is applauded, the same honors are bestowed upon her 
that were given Duclos, and that evening both storytellers dine with 
Messieurs. Later, at the o rgies, Adelaide, Aline, Augustine, and 
Zelmire are condemned to be whipped with switches all over the body 
save upon the breasts, but as the friends are to sport with them for another two months, they are treated circumspectly.    
PART THE THIRD  
THE 150 CRIMINAL PASSIONS, OR THOSE 
BELONGING TO THE THIRD CLASS, 
COMPOSING THE THIRTY -ONE DAYS OF 
JANUARY PASSED IN HEARING THE 
NARRATIONS OF MADAME MARTAINE; 
INTERSPERSED AMONGST WHICH ARE THE 
SCANDALOUS DOINGS AT THE CHÂTEAU 
DURING THAT MONTH; ALL BEING SET DOWN 
IN THE FORM OF A JOURNAL. ( DRAFT )   
THE 1ST OF JANUARY . 1. He loves nothing but to have himself 
embuggered, and he is never able to find too thick a prick. But, says Martaine, 
she’ll not lay much emphasis upon this passion which is too simple a taste and 
one wherewith her auditors are far too well acquainted.  
2. He wishes to depucelate none but little girls between the ages of three and 
seven, in the bum. This is the man who had her pucelage in this manner: she 
was four years old, t he ordeal caused her to fall ill, her mother implored this 
man to give aid, money. But his heart was of flint …. 
And this man is the same one of whom Duclos spoke on the 29th of 
November; the same again who appears in Champville’s story of the 2nd of 
Decemb er. He has a prick of colossal proportions, he is enormously rich. He 
depucelates two little girls every day: one of them in the cunt, in the morning, 
as Champville related on the 2nd of December, the other in the bum, in the 
afternoon; and he has a quanti ty of other passions as well. Four women held 
Martaine when he embuggered her. His discharge lasts six minutes, and he 
bellows like a bull while it is in progress. His simple, straightforward, and 
adroit method of threading her needle, even though she was a young thing of 
four; describe all that.  
3. Her mother sells the pucelage of Martaine’s older brother to a man who 
sodomizes boys only, and who would have them exactly seven years old.  
4. She is now thirteen, her brother fifteen; they go to the home of a man 
who constrains the brother to fuck his sister, and who alternately fucks now the 
boy’s ass, now the girl’s, while they are in each other’s clutches.  
Martaine proudly describes her ass; Messieurs request her to display 
it, she exhibits it from the platf orm. The man she has just spoken of, she continues, is the same person who 
figured in Duclos’ story of the 21st of November, the Comte, and who will 
appear in Desgranges’ of the 24th of February.  
5. He has himself fucked while embuggering the brother and s ister; the same 
personage Desgranges will refer to on the 24th of February.  
That same evening, the Duc depucelates the bum of Hébé, who is a 
mere twelve. The operation succeeds only at the price of infinite trouble: 
she is held by the four duennas and admi nistered by Duclos and 
Champville. And as there is to be a festival on the morrow, in order that things run smoothly then, Hébé’s ass is also, on the evening of the 1st of 
January, surrendered to the society, and all four friends take full 
advantage of it.  She is carried away unconscious; has been buggered 
seven times.  
(Martaine must not say that she has a uterine deformity; that would 
be false.)  
THE 2ND. 6. He has four girls fart in his mouth all the while he embuggers 
a fifth, then he changes girls. All r otate: all fart, all are embuggered; he does 
not discharge until he has finished with the fifth ass.  
7. Amuses himself with three small boys: embuggers and has each of them 
shit, puts all three to each task, and frigs the boy who is inactive.  
8. He fucks t he sister in the mouth while having her brother shit into his 
mouth, then he reverses their roles, and during both exercises he is embuggered.  
9. He embuggers none but girls of fifteen, but only after having, by way of 
preliminary, flogged them with all hi s strength.  
10. For an hour he pinches and molests her buttocks and asshole, then 
embuggers her while she is flogged with exceeding violence.  The ninth week’s festival is celebrated upon that day: Hercule weds 
Hébé and fucks her cuntwardly. Curval and the Duc take turns 
sodomizing first the husband, then the wife.  
THE 3RD. 11. He embuggers only during mass, and discharges at the 
moment of the Elevation of the Host.  
12. He embuggers only while kicking a crucifix about in the dust; the girl 
must treat it with  like contempt.  
13. The man who amused himself with Eugénie on Duclos’ eleventh day 
has the girl shit, wipes the well -beshitted ass; he possesses an outsized prick, 
and embuggers, ploughing into the asshole behind a consecrated Host.  
14. Embuggers a youth,  has a second youth embugger him, both ploughing, 
as above, behind a protective Host; upon the nape of the neck of the boy he is 
embuggering rests another Host, and a third youth shits thereupon. He 
discharges thus, without changing position, but while utt ering fearful 
blasphemies.  
15. He embuggers the priest while the latter is in the act of saying mass, 
and when the priest has performed the consecration, the fucker withdraws for a 
moment; profiting from this brief interval, the priest buries the Host in h is ass, 
the fucker returns straightway to work and re -embuggers him, tamping in the 
wafer.  
That evening, Curval, with a Host depucelates in the bum the young 
and charming Zélamir. And Antinoüs fucks the Président with another 
Host; while fucking, the Président’s tongue pushes a third into 
Fanchon’s asshole.  
THE 4TH. 16. He likes to embugger none but very aged women while they 
are being lashed. 17. Embuggers only very aged men while being fucked.  
18. Has a regular intrigue with his son.  
19. Will embugger non e but monsters, or blackamoors, or deformed persons.  
20. In order to combine incest, adultery, sodomy and sacrilege, he embuggers 
his married daughter with a Host.  
That evening the four friends avail themselves of Zélamir’s ass.  
THE 5TH. 21. He has two men  alternately fuck and flagellate him while he 
embuggers a young boy and while an old man sheds a turd into his mouth. He 
eats the turd.  
22. Two men take turns fucking him, one in the mouth, the other in the ass; 
this exercise must last no less than three h ours by the clock. He swallows the 
fuck emanating from him who fucks him in the mouth.  
23. He has himself fucked by ten men, whom he pays so much by the 
discharge; during a given day he withstands as many as twenty -four without 
himself discharging.  
24. For the purposes of ass -fuckery, he prostitutes his wife, his daughter, 
and his sister, and watches the proceedings.  
25. He employs eight men at a time: one in his mouth, one in his ass, one 
beneath his left testicle, one beneath his right; he frigs two other s, each with 
one hand, he lodges a seventh between his thighs and the eighth frigs himself upon his face.  
That evening, the Duc deflowers Michette’s ass and causes her 
frightful pain.  THE 6TH. 26. He has an elderly man embuggered in his presence; several 
times over the prick is removed from that ancient asshole, it is placed in the 
mouth of the examiner, who sucks it, then sucks the old man’s prick, sucks his 
asshole, and penetrates it while he who has been fucking the old man now 
embuggers the lecher, and is lashed by the lecher’s governess. For the lecher is 
still a young man.  
27. He vigorously constricts the neck of the fifteen -year-old girl he is 
embuggering—choking her neck has the effect of tightening her anus; meanwhile, he is flogged with a bull’s pi zzle. 
28. He has large spheres of quicksilver inserted into his bowels. These 
spheres rise up in his entrails, then descend, and during the excessive titillation caused thereby, he sucks pricks, swallows fuck, has shit out of whores’ asses, 
bolts turds. Th is ecstasy lasts a good two hours.  
29. He would have himself embuggered by the father while he sodomizes 
that father’s son and daughter.  
Michette’s ass is surrendered to the company that evening. Durcet 
selects Martaine for his bedroom companion, following  the precedent 
established by the Duc, who has Duclos, and by Curval, who has Fanchon; Martaine has begun to exert upon Durcet much the same lubricious influence Duclos exerts upon Blangis.  
THE 7TH. 30. He fucks a turkey whose head is gripped between the l egs of a 
girl lying on her belly —while in action he looks quite as if he were 
embuggering the girl. While he is at work he is being sodomized, and the 
moment he discharges, the girl cuts the turkey’s throat.  
31. He fucks a goat from behind while being flog ged; the goat conceives and 
gives birth to a monster. Monster though it be, he embuggers it.  32. He embuggers bucks.  
33. Wishes to see a woman discharge after having been frigged by a dog; 
and he shoots the dog dead while its head is between the woman’s th ighs. But 
he does not harm the woman.  
34. Embuggers a swan after having popped a Host up into its ass; then 
strangles the bird upon discharging.  
This same evening, the Bishop embuggers Cupidon for the first time.  
THE 8TH. 35. He has himself placed in a specially prepared wickerwork 
structure provided with an opening at one end; against this opening he places 
his asshole after having anointed it with mare’s fuck. The structure he is in 
represents a mare’s body and is covered with horsehide. A genuine horse i s 
fetched in, mounts the artificial mare, embuggers him and meanwhile he fucks 
a pretty white bitch he has with him in the basket.  
36. He fucks a cow, it conceives and gives birth to a monster which, shortly 
thereafter, he fucks.  
37. In a similar basket he  places a woman who receives a bull’s member in 
her cunt. He watches this entertaining spectacle.  
38. He has a tamed serpent which he introduces into his anus; while being 
thus sodomized, he embuggers a cat in a basket. Firmly contained therein, the animal  can do him no harm.  
39. He fucks a she -ass while having himself embuggered by an ass. (For 
this delight an elaborate machine is indispensable. We will give a 
description of it elsewhere.)  
That evening, Cupidon’s ass is presented to the society.  THE 9TH. 40. He fucks the nostrils of a goat which meanwhile is licking 
his balls; and during this exercise, he is alternately flogged and has his asshole 
licked.  
41. He embuggers a sheep while a dog licks his asshole.  
42. He embuggers a dog whose head is cut off while he discharges.  
43. He obliges a whore to frig a donkey, he is fucked while observing this 
spectacle.  
44. He fucks a monkey’s asshole, the animal is enclosed in a basket; while 
being sodomized, the monkey is tormented in order that its anus will constri ct 
about the libertine’s member.  
That evening, the tenth week’s festival is celebrated by the marriage of 
Bum -Cleaver and Michette; the union is consummated, ’tis  a dolorous 
experience for the bride.  
THE 10TH. Martaine announces that she is going to move on to 
another passion, and that the whip, of central importance in 
Champville’s contributions of December, will enjoy only a secondary one in hers.  
45. The procuress is obliged to find him girls guilty of some felony or other; 
he arrives, frightens them, sa ys that they are going certainly to be arrested but 
that he will take it upon himself to protect them provided they will submit to a 
violent fustigation, and, afraid as they are, they let themselves be whipped till 
they bleed.  
46. Has a woman with beautifu l hair brought to him, saying he simply 
wishes to examine her hair; but he cuts it off very traitorously and discharges 
upon seeing her melt into tears and bewail her misfortune, at which he laughs 
immoderately.  47. With all sorts of attendant ceremonies, she enters a dark room. She sees 
no one there, but overhears a conversation regarding her —give details of this 
conversation —which is of a nature to frighten her nearly to death. Finally, 
she receives a deluge of slaps and blows without knowing whence they come; 
she hears the cries accompanying a discharge, then is taken out of the room.  
48. She enters a kind of subterranean sepulcher which is lit by nothing but a 
few oil lamps; they reveal all the horror of the place. After a moment, during which she is abl e to observe everything, all the lamps are extinguished, a 
horrible series of screams and the rattlings of chains are heard, she collapses in a swoon; if she does not faint, the noises are multiplied until finally she does fall unconscious from terror. Onc e unconscious, a man swoops down upon her and 
embuggers her, then abandons her, and valets later come to her rescue; he must have very young and very inexperienced girls. Novices, if possible.  
49. She enters a similar place, but provide a few details to di stinguish it 
from the sepulcher above. She is stripped, thrust naked into a coffin, the coffin’s lid is nailed down, and the rhythm of the hammer driving the nails finally excites the man’s discharge.  
That afternoon, Zelmire was taken down to the cellars w e have 
previously mentioned, which had been prepared in the manner we have just described. The four friends are there, naked and equipped with 
weapons; Zelmire swoons, ana while she is unconscious, Curval 
depucelates her bum. The Président has been seized by the very same 
sentiments of love (mixed with lubric rage) for this girl that the Duc has for Augustine.  
THE 11TH. 50. The same Duc de Florville, of whom Duclos spoke on the 
29th of November, and of whom Desgranges, in her fifth story, will speak on the 26th of February, wishes to have the corpse of a beautiful and recently murdered girl placed upon a bed covered with black satin; he fondles the body, 
explores its every nook and cranny, and embuggers it.  
51. Another individual requires two corpses, those of a boy and of a girl, 
and he embuggers the youth’s dead body while kissing the buttocks of the girl’s and driving his tongue into its anus.  
52. He receives the girl in a small room filled with most convincing wax 
representations of dead bodies, they are all pierced in various ways. He recommends that the girl make her choice, saying he intends to kill her in 
whatever way she prefers, inviting her to choose the corpse whose wounds 
please her most.  
53. He binds her to an authentic corpse, knee to knee, mout h to mouth, and 
flogs her until the back of her body is covered with blood.  
Zelmire’s ass is made the evening’s treat, but before being served up, 
she is subjected to a trial, and she is advised that she will be killed that 
night; she believes what she is told but, instead of dispatching her, 
Messieurs are content each to give her a hundred lashes after having generously embuggered her, and Curval takes her to bed with him. She 
is further embuggered all night.  
THE 12TH. 54. The girl must be menstruating. Sh e arrives at his home, a 
valet conducts her to a room in the cellar where the libertine stands awaiting 
her, but he is near a kind of reservoir of icy water, more than twelve feet across 
and eight deep; it is concealed in such a way the girl does not notic e it. She 
approaches the man, he topples her into it, and discharges the instant he hears 
the splash; she is pulled back out at once, but as she is menstruating, severe 
disability is the very frequent result of her adventure.  55. He lowers her into a very deep well and shouts down after her that he is 
about to fill it with large stones; he flings in a few clods of earth to frighten 
her, and discharges into the well, his seed landing on the naked whore’s head.  
56. He has a pregnant woman brought to him and terrifies her with threats 
and words, flogs her, continuing his ill- treatment of her until she either has a 
miscarriage there and then, or will surely have one when she returns home. If 
she disgorges her fruit while under his roof, she receives double payme nt. 
57. He locks her into a black dungeon, surrounded by cats, rats, and mice; 
he gives her to understand she has been put there for the rest of her life, and every day he goes to her door, frigs himself, and banters with her.  
58. He inserts sheafs of stra w in her ass, ignites them, and watches her 
buttocks sizzle as the straw burns short.  
That evening, Curval announces he will take Zelmire to be his wife, 
and does indeed publicly marry her. The Bishop officiates at the 
wedding, the Président repudiates Jul ie who therewith falls into the 
greatest discredit, but her libertinage speaks strongly in her favor and the 
Bishop is disposed to protect her somewhat until the time shall arrive for 
him to declare himself entirely for her —he will so declare himself later  
on. 
More clearly than ever before, upon this particular evening his 
associates notice Durcet’s teasing hatred for Adelaide; he torments her, 
vexes her, she wails and is melancholy. And her father, the Président, 
does not by any means give her his support.  
THE 13TH. 59. He attaches a girl to a St. Andrew’s cross suspended in the 
air, and whips her with all his might, flaying her entire back. After which, he 
unties her and casts her out through a window, but mattresses are there to lighten her fall, upon hea ring which he discharges. Give further details of the 
scene in order to justify his reaction.  
60. He has her swallow a drug which unhinges her imagination and causes 
her to see horrible things in the room. She fancies the room is being flooded, sees 
the wa ter rise, climbs upon a chair, but still the water mounts, reaches her, and 
she is told that she has no alternative but to leap in and swim; she plunges, but falls upon the stone floor and injures herself badly. ’Tis  at this point the 
libertine discharges;  previously, he has taken much pleasure in kissing her ass.  
61. He holds her suspended by a rope that runs up through a pulley affixed 
to the top of a tower; he stands at a window, she hangs directly outside and 
opposite him. He frigs himself and threatens  to sever the rope as he discharges. 
While all this is afoot he is being flogged, and earlier he induced the whore to 
shit for him.  
62. She is held by four slender cords, each attached to one of her limbs. She is 
held thus in a very cruel and painful posit ion; a trap door is opened beneath 
her and a charcoal brazier, very hot, is discovered to her view: if the cords break, she falls thereupon. The roué meddles with the cords, strains them, cuts 
one while discharging. Sometimes he suspends the girl in the sa me attitude, 
places a weight upon her belly, then suddenly jerks all four cords, pulling her 
up, and in so doing rupturing her stomach and tearing her muscles. She 
remains where she is until he discharges.  
63. He binds her to a low stool; suspended a foot above her head is a dagger 
whose point is filed needle sharp; the dagger hangs by a hair —if the hair 
snaps, the dagger drives into her skull. The libertine frigs himself while 
watching his victim’s anxious contortions. An hour later, he frees her and 
blood ies her buttocks with light jabs of the same dagger which, he would like to 
have her remark, pricks very nicely; he discharges upon her blood -soaked ass.  That evening, the Bishop depucelates Colombe’s bum, and after his 
discharge lashes her with a whip, fo r he cannot bear to have a girl cause 
him to discharge.  
THE 14TH. 64. He embuggers a young novice who knows nothing of the 
ways of the world, and as he discharges, he fires two pistol shots very close to 
her ear. The powder singes her hair.  
65. He makes her sit down in an armchair balanced on springs; her weight 
releases a number of springs connected to iron rings which bind her tightly to the chair. Certain levers and gears advance twenty daggers until their points 
graze her skin; the man frigs himself, th e while explaining that the least 
movement of the chair will cause her to be stabbed. He sprays his fuck upon 
her, in so doing touching the chair very delicately with his foot.  
66. A bascule carries her down into a small crypt hung in black and 
furnished w ith a prie-dieu, a coffin, and an assortment of death’s heads. She 
sees six specters armed with clubs, swords, pistols, sabers, poignards, and 
lances, and each is about to pierce her in a different place. Overcome by fear, she sways, is about to fall; the man enters, catches her in his arms, and flogs her 
until he is weary, then discharges as he embuggers her. If she is unconscious at the time he enters, and this is frequently the case, his lash restores her to her senses.  
67. She enters a room in a tower, in its center she sees a large charcoal 
brazier; upon a table, poison and a dirk; she is allowed to choose the manner whereby she is to perish. It generally happens that she elects poison. ’Tis  a 
variety of opiate which plunges her into a profound drowsine ss; while the spell 
lasts, the libertine embuggers her. He is the same personage Duclos cited on the 
27th of November and of whom Desgranges will say more on the 6th of 
February.  68. The same gentleman who will figure in Desgranges’ story of the 16th of 
February goes through the entire ceremony of preparing to decapitate the girl; 
just as the blow falls, a rope suddenly snatches the girl’s body away, the axe -
blade sinks three inches into the block. If the rope does not drag the girl away, 
she dies. He disch arges while bringing down the axe. But prior to this, he has 
embuggered her as she lies with her neck upon the block.  
Colombe’s ass is plumbed by the society that evening, and Messieurs 
pretend to cut off her head. They are accomplished actors.  
THE 15TH. 69. He slips a noose around the whore’s throat and hangs her. 
Her feet rest upon a stool, a cord is tied to one leg of the stool, he sits in an armchair, watching and having the whore’s daughter frig him. When he 
discharges, he pulls the cord, the whore han gs, he leaves, valets enter and cut 
the whore down. A leech lets some blood from one of her veins and she returns 
to life, but these attentions are given her without the libertine’s knowledge. He 
goes off to bed with the whore’s daughter and sodomizes her all night long, 
while doing so telling her he has hanged her mother. Have Martaine say that Desgranges will refer to him again.  
70. He holds the girl by the ears and walks her around the room, 
discharging as he parades with her.  
71. He pinches the girl’s b ody, nipping her everywhere save upon the breast, 
till she turns black and blue.  
72. He pinches her breasts, molests them, and kneads them until they are 
completely bruised.  
73. He writes letters and words upon her breasts, working with a needle 
which has a poisoned tip; her breasts become infected, and she suffers 
excruciatingly.  74. Drives between one and two thousand pins into her breasts, and 
discharges when he has covered them.  
More libertine with every passing day, Julie is discovered frigging 
herself  with Champville. The Bishop affords her additional protection 
and thereafter admits her into his bedchamber, as the Duc has Duclos, 
Durcet Martaine, and Curval Fanchon. Julie confesses that at the time of 
her repudiation, having been condemned to sleep in the stables with the 
other animals, she appealed to Champville and was taken into her 
chamber; they have been bedding together ever since.  
THE 16TH. 75. He buries large hatpins in the girl’s flesh, dotting her entire 
body, her nipples included; he dischar ges after having driven home the last pin. 
Desgranges will return to the same enthusiast in her fourth story of the 27th of 
February.  
76. He gives her a great deal to drink, then sews up her cunt and asshole; he 
leaves her thus sealed up till he remarks sh e is nigh to collapsing from the need 
to piss and shit, two activities which are impossible in the state she is in; or else 
he waits until the weight of the shit and the pressure of the piss finally break 
the stitches.  
77. Four gentlemen enter the room and  cuff the girl, strike and kick her 
until she falls. When she is down, all four mutually frig one another and discharge.  
78. She is deprived of air, then given air, then ’tis  taken away again. She is 
lodged within a pneumatic machine.  
To celebrate the end of the eleventh week, the wedding of Colombe 
and Antinoüs takes place that day, and is consummated. The Duc, who 
has been indulging in some prodigious cunt -fuckery with Augustine, has been seized by a lubricious fury: he has had Duclos hold her, and has 
given her three hundred lashes distributed between the middle of her 
back and her calves, and, after that, has embuggered Duclos while kissing Augustine’s flogged ass. Directly after having molested her, he does some foolish things, for his head is completel y giddy: he has her sit 
beside him at table, will touch no food save what he has out of her mouth, dotes upon her, and does a thousand other things, all very illogical and very libertine. But he and his confreres are men of that 
strange turn of character.  
THE 17TH. 79. He binds the girl belly down upon a dining table and eats 
a piping hot omelette served upon her buttocks. He uses an exceedingly sharp fork. 
80. He immobilizes her head above a grill, lights a brisk fire, and roasts her 
until she loses consci ousness, embuggering her steadily.  
81. He gently toasts the skin of her breasts and buttocks, proceeding very 
gradually, and using sulphur -tipped matches.  
82. He uses candles and extinguishes them again and again by snuffing 
them out in her cunt, her assho le, and upon her nipples.  
83. With a match he sears her eyelids; this prevents her from sleeping 
soundly that night, for she cannot close her eyes.  
That evening, the Duc depucelates Giton, who finds the experience 
discomfiting, for the Duc is enormous, fuc ks with great brutality, and 
Giton is, after all, only twelve.  
THE 18TH. 84. Pointing a pistol at her heart, he obliges her to chew and 
swallow a live coal, and then he washes out her cunt with aqua fortis.  85. He has her dance the  olivettes. Naked, she is  to dance round four 
pillars; but the only path her naked feet can tread is studded with shards of 
broken glass and bits of sharp metal and pointed tacks and nails; by each pillar 
stands a man, a bundle of switches in his hand, and he lashes whichever side  of 
her body she offers every time she passes by him. She is thus obliged to run a 
certain number of turns around, it all depending upon whether she is more or 
less attractive. The most beautiful are harried the most.  
86. He strikes her violently in the fa ce until the blows of his fist bring blood 
from her nose, and he continues yet a while longer, the blood notwithstanding; he discharges and mixes his fuck with the blood she has lost.  
87. Employing very well -heated tongs, he pinches her flesh, and mainly h er 
buttocks, her mons veneris and her breasts. Desgranges will have more to say about this personage.  
88. Upon various parts of her naked, reclining body, especially the more 
sensitive areas, he places little mounds of gunpowder, then sets fire to them.  
Giton’s ass is made public property that evening, and after this 
ceremony, he is flogged by Curval, the Duc, and the Bishop, who have 
fucked him.  
THE 19TH. 89. He inserts a cylinder of gunpowder in her cunt, removes 
the cylinder, leaves the powder there; he puts a match to the charge and 
ejaculates upon seeing the flames dart forth. Earlier, he has kissed her ass.  
90. He soaks her everywhere from head to foot with brandy, brings a match 
near and entertains himself with the spectacle of this poor girl all cove red with 
flames. Then he discharges. He repeats the same operation two or three times.  
91. He gives her bowels a rinsing with boiling oil.  92. He introduces a red -hot iron into her anus, another into her cunt, after 
having thoroughly whipped the latter.  
93. He likes to trample upon a pregnant woman until she aborts. Prior to 
this he whips her.  
That same evening, Curval depucelates Sophie’s bum, but this ordeal 
succeeds another: she has first been given one hundred lashes by each of 
the friends and is stream ing blood. Directly Curval has discharged into 
her ass, he offers to pay the society five hundred louis for permission to 
take her down to the cellars that very evening and to be given a free hand with her. Curval’s request is rejected, he re- embuggers her , and upon 
emerging from her ass after this second discharge, he gives her a kick 
which sends her sprawling upon a mattress fifteen feet away. He 
revenges himself upon Zelmire, whom he flogs till his arm aches.  
THE 20TH. 94. He appears to be caressing the girl who is frigging him, she 
suspects nothing; but at the moment he discharges, he seizes her head and batters it against the wall. The blow is so strong and so unexpected that she usually falls unconscious.  
95. They are four libertines assembled; they ju dge a girl and, ultimately 
disagreeing upon what punishment to inflict, decide to sentence her individually. All in all, she receives one hundred strokes of the whip; each juror 
metes out twenty- five of them: the first flogs her from the back to the loins,  the 
second from the loins to the calves, the third from the neck to the navel, breasts 
included, the fourth from the belly to the shins.  
96. Using a pin, he pricks each of her eyes, each nipple, and her clitoris.  
97. He drops molten sealing wax upon her b uttocks, into her cunt, and 
upon her breasts.  98. He opens the veins in one arm and bleeds her until she faints.  
Curval suggests they bleed Constance because of her pregnancy; and 
bled she is, until she collapses, ’tis  Durcet who acts as her leech. That 
evening, Messieurs avail themselves of Sophie’s ass, and the Duc 
proposes she be bled also, it could not possibly do her any harm, no, on 
the contrary, they might make a nice pudding of her blood for 
tomorrow’s luncheon. His idea is acclaimed, Curval now pla ys the leech, 
Duclos frigs him while he operates, and he wishes to make the puncture 
at the same moment his fuck departs his balls; and he makes a generous 
puncture, but his blade finds the vein none the less. Despite it all, Sophie 
has pleased the Bishop,  who adopts her for his wife, repudiating Aline, 
who falls into the greatest discredit.  
THE 21ST. 99. He bleeds both of her arms and would have her remain 
standing while her blood flows; now and again he stops the bleeding and flogs 
her, then he opens the wounds again, and this continues until she collapses. He 
only discharges when she faints. Earlier in the game he had her shit for him.  
100. He bleeds her from all four of her limbs and from her jugular vein too, 
and frigs himself while watching the five fo untains of blood.  
101. He lightly scarifies her flesh, concentrating upon her buttocks, but 
neglecting her breasts.  
102. He scarifies her vigorously, cutting deep, devoting particular attention 
to her breasts and especially to her nipples, and to the envir ons of her asshole 
when he turns his attentions to her behind. Next, he cauterizes the wounds 
with a red -hot iron.  
103. He is bound hand and foot, as if he were a wild beast, and he is 
draped in a tiger’s skin. When thus readied, he is excited, irritated, whipped, beaten, his ass is frigged; opposite him is a plump young girl, naked and tied 
by her feet to the floor, by her neck to the ceiling, in such wise she cannot stir. 
When the roué is all a -sweat, his captors free him, he leaps upon the girl, bites 
her everywhere and above all her clitoris and her nipples, which he generally 
manages to remove with his teeth. He roars and cries like a ferocious animal, 
and discharges while shrieking. The girl must shit, he eats her turd upon the 
floor.  
That evening, the  Bishop depucelates Narcisse; he is surrendered to 
the society the same evening, so that the festival of the 23rd will not be disturbed. Before embuggering him, the Duc has him shit into his 
mouth and render him, together with the turd, his predecessors’ fuck. 
And then, after having sodomized the lad, Blangis scourges him.  
THE 22ND. 104. He pulls out her teeth and scratches her gums with 
needles. Sometimes he heats the needles.  
105. He breaks one of her fingers, several upon occasion.  
106. Employing a heavy  hammer, he flattens one of her feet.  
107. He removes a hand, sawing through the wrist.  
108. While discharging, he batters in her front teeth with a hammer. He is 
very fond of sucking her mouth before proceeding to the major phase of his 
operation.  
The Duc depucelates Rosette in the rear that evening, and the same 
instant his prick sounds her ass, Curval extracts one of the little girl’s teeth —this in order that she may experience two terrible pains at the 
same time. So that the morrow’s festival not be dis turbed, her ass is 
made generally available that same evening. When Curval has discharged thereinto (and he is the last of the four to do so), he sends the 
child spinning with a blow of his fist.  
THE 23RD. Because of the holiday, only four are related.  
109. He amputates one foot.  
110. He breaks one of her arms as he embuggers her.  
111. Using a crowbar, he breaks a bone in her leg and embuggers her after 
doing so.  
112. He ties her to a stepladder, her limbs being attached in a peculiar 
manner, a cord is tied  to the ladder; he pulls the cord, the ladder falls. 
Sometimes she breaks one limb, sometimes another.  
Upon that day Invictus was married to Rosette; their wedding 
celebrated the twelfth week’s festival. That evening, Rosette is bled after she has been fuc ked, and Aline is likewise bled after Hercule has fucked 
her; both are bled in such a way their blood spurts upon our libertine’s 
thighs and pricks. Messieurs frig themselves while looking on, and 
discharge when both have fainted.  
THE 24TH. 113. He cuts of f one of her ears. (See to it that you specify what 
these persons do by way of a prelude to their major stunt.)  
114. He slits her lips and nostrils.  
115. After having sucked and bitten it, he pierces her tongue with a hot 
iron. 
116. He tears several nails from her fingers, and also from her toes.  
117. He cuts off one of her fingers at the last joint.  And, upon close questioning, the storyteller having said that, provided 
the wound is dressed at once, such a mutilation has no undesirable 
aftereffects, Durcet  straightway cuts the end off one of Adelaide’s 
fingers, for his lewd jesting and teasing have been increasingly directed 
against her. His practical joke fetches a discharge from him, his flow of 
fuck is accompanied by unheard -of transports.  
That same even ing, Curval depucelates Augustine’s ass, even though 
she is now the Duc’s wife. Her anguish, her sufferings. Curval rages 
against her afterward; he conspires with the Duc to take her down to the 
cellars without further delay, and they tell Durcet that if t hey are granted 
permission to carry out the expedition, they in their turn will allow him 
to dispatch Adelaide at once, but the Bishop delivers an impassioned 
sermon to those truants, and obtains the promise that they will restrain themselves yet a little longer for the sake of their own pleasure. Curval 
and the Duc hence limit themselves to giving Augustine a ferocious 
whipping. Both lash her at once.  
THE 25TH. 118. He distills fifteen or twenty drops of molten lead into her 
mouth and burns her gums with a qua fortis.  
119. After having had her lick his beshitted ass with her tongue, he snips off 
the end of that same tongue, then, when once she is mutilated, he embuggers 
her. 
120. He employs a machine involving a hollow steel bit which bores holes 
in the fles h and which, when removed, takes with it a round chunk of flesh 
which is as long as the drill has penetrated; the machine bores on automatically 
if not withdrawn.  
121. He transforms a boy of ten or twelve into a eunuch.  122. With a pair of pliers isolating  and raising each nipple, he cuts off the 
same with a pair of scissors.  
That same evening, Augustine’s ass is made generally available. While 
embuggering her, Curval had wished to kiss Constance’s breast, and 
upon discharging, he made off with a nipple in his teeth, but as her 
wound was treated and bandaged at once, Messieurs assured one another 
that the accident would have no harmful effect upon the child in her womb. Curval says to his colleagues, in answer to their pleasantries upon 
his mounting rage aga inst Constance, that he has no control over the 
fury she inspires in him.  
When in his turn the Duc embuggers Augustine, his own powerful 
feelings for that beautiful girl are exhaled with incomparable violence: 
had the others not kept an eye upon him, he would have injured her, either while mauling her breasts or squeezing her neck with all his 
strength as he discharged. Once again he asks the society to put her in 
his power, but he is requested to wait for Desgranges’ narrations. His brother entreats him to  be patient and abstain until he himself sets an 
example by dispatching Aline; haste, the Bishop points out, makes 
waste; and why spoil the latter part of the holiday by upsetting a 
schedule admirably designed to guarantee them a daily fare of 
moderation, wherein only happiness lies? However, the Duc will not 
listen to reason, he cannot any longer hold himself in check, and so, 
since he absolutely must torture the lovely girl, he is allowed to inflict a 
light wound upon her arm. He executes it upon the fles hy part of her left 
forearm, sucks blood from the cut he has made, and discharges; 
Augustine is so skillfully patched up that four days later no trace of the 
Duc’s teeth marks is to be seen.  THE 26TH. 123. He breaks a bottle of thin glass against the face of the girl, 
who is bound and unable to protect herself; before doing so, he sucked her 
mouth with great vigor and sucked her tongue also.  
124. He tears off both her legs, ties one of her hands behind her back, puts a 
little stick into her free hand, and i nvites her to defend herself. Then he attacks 
her, wielding his sword with great vigor and dexterity, wounds her here and 
there, and finally discharges upon her wounds.  
125. He stretches her upon a St. Andrew’s cross, goes through the ceremony 
of breaking her, strains but does not dislocate three of her limbs, but does 
definitely break the fourth, either an arm or a leg.  
126. Pistol in hand, he has her stand facing to the right and lets fly with a 
charge which grazes her two breasts; he aims to shoot away o ne of her little 
nipples.  
127. He has her crouch down twenty feet away and present her buttocks; he 
shoots a bullet up her ass.  
That same evening, the Bishop depucelates Fanny’s bum.  
THE 27TH. 128. The same man of whom Desgranges will speak on the 
24th of February flogs a pregnant woman upon the belly until she miscarries; she must lay the egg in his presence, and he lashes her till she does.  
129. He very tidily castrates a young lad of sixteen or seventeen after 
having embuggered and whipped him.  
130. He m ust have a maiden brought to him, he slices off her clitoris with a 
razor, then deflowers her with a cylinder of heated iron, driving the device 
home with hammer blows.  131. This personage performs an abortion when the woman’s pregnancy 
has entered its eig hth month. He forces her to drink a certain brew which 
brings the child out dead in a trice. Upon other occasions, this libertine by his 
art causes the child to be born from the mother’s asshole. But the child emerges dead, and the woman’s life is gravely imperiled.  
132. He severs an arm.  
That evening, Fanny’s ass is made generally available, Durcet rescues 
her from a torture his colleagues had been preparing for her; he takes her 
to be his wife, has the Bishop perform the marriage, and repudiates 
Adelaide,  who is submitted to the torture originally readied for Fanny. It 
is however a paltry business after all: the Duc embuggers her while 
Durcet breaks her finger.  
THE 28TH. 133. He cuts off both hands at the wrist and cauterizes the 
wounds with a hot iron.  
134. He removes the tongue, cutting it at the roots, and cauterizes it with a 
hot iron.  
135. He amputates one leg, usually having someone else cut it off while he 
embuggers her.  
136. He extracts all her teeth, replacing each one with a red -hot nail, which 
he secures in place with a hammer; he does this directly after having fucked the 
woman in the mouth.  
137. He removes one eye.  
Julie is roundly whipped by everyone that evening and all her fingers 
are pricked with a needle. This latter operation takes place w hile the 
Bishop, who is passing fond of her, embuggers her.  THE 29TH. 138. Allowing molten sealing wax to flow thereupon, he 
blinds and ultimately dissolves first one eye, then the other.  
139. He neatly slices off one breast, then cauterizes the wound with  a hot 
iron. Desgranges will here interject that ’tis this same man who made off with 
the nipple she is missing, and that she is positively certain he ate it after 
having cooked it upon a griddle.  
140. He amputates both buttocks after having flogged and em buggered her. 
It is believed that he too eats the meat.  
141. He shaves off both her ears . 
142. Clips off all the extremities, to wit: ten fingers, ten toes, two nipples, 
one clitoris and the end of the tongue.  
That evening, Aline, after a vigorous whipping  given her by the four 
friends and an embuggery the Bishop performs for the last time, is 
condemned to have a finger on either hand and a toe on either foot cut 
off by each friend. Thus she loses a total of eight parts.  
THE 30TH. 143. He carves away severa l chunks of flesh, selecting them 
from divers areas upon her body: he has them roasted and obliges her to eat them with him. Desgranges will mention the same man on the 8th and 17th 
of February.  
144. He cuts off a young boy’s four limbs, embuggers the trun k, feeds him 
well and allows him so to live; as the arms and legs were not severed too close 
to the body, the boy lives for quite a while. And the surgeon embuggers him steadily for approximately a year.  
145. He chains one of the girl’s hands and secures t he chain to the wall; he 
leaves her thus, without food. Near her is a large knife, and just beyond her reach sits an excellent meal: if she wishes to eat, she has but to cut through her forearm; otherwise, she dies of starvation. Prior to this he has embug gered her. 
He observes her through a window.  
146. He manacles both mother and daughter; in order that they both 
survive, one has got to get to the food placed not far away: survival, that is, 
means that one must sacrifice a hand. He amuses himself listenin g to them 
discuss their dilemma, and argue about who is to resolve it.  
She recounts only four stories, for that evening the thirteenth week’s 
festival is to take place. During it, the Duc, acting in the capacity of a 
woman, is married to Hercule, who is to be the husband; acting now as a 
man, the Duc takes Zéphyr to be his wife. The young bardash who, as 
the reader is aware, possesses the prettiest ass amongst the eight boys, is 
dressed as a girl, and so clad appears as beautiful as the goddess of love. 
The ceremony is consecrated by the Bishop and transpires within the 
sight of the entire household. The dear little Zéphyr surrenders his 
virginal bum to the Duc, who finds all his pleasure therein, but much 
trouble making a successful entry; Zéphyr is rather badly torn, and bleeds profusely. Hercule fucks the Duc throughout this operation.  
THE 31ST. 147. He plucks out both her eyes and leaves her locked in a 
room, saying that she has before her what she needs to eat, that she has but to 
get up and search for i t. But in order to reach the food she must cross a broad 
plate of iron, which, of course, she cannot see, and which is kept heated to a 
very high temperature. Situated at a window, he amuses himself watching how she manages: will she burn herself, or will she prefer to perish from 
hunger? She has been, previously, very soundly whipped.  
148. He subjects her to the rope torture; this consists in having one’s four 
limbs tied to ropes, then one is raised high in the air and suddenly dropped from a considerable height, then raised, then dropped; each fall dislocates and sometimes breaks the limbs, because one never quite falls to the ground, the 
ropes halting one just a short distance above it.  
149. He inflicts upon her a quantity of deep wounds into which he pou rs 
boiling pitch and molten lead.  
150. The moment after she gives birth to a child, he binds her hand and 
foot, and ties her child not far away from her. The infant wails, she is unable to get to it. And thus she must watch it expire. Then he steps up and lashes the mother, aiming his whipstrokes at her cunt and managing the thing so that 
the interior of her vagina is well tickled. He himself is usually the child’s 
father.  
151. He gives her copiously to drink, then sews up her cunt, her asshole and 
her mout h as well, and leaves her thus until the water bursts through its 
conduits, or until she dies.  
(Determine why there is one too many; if one is to be deleted, 
suppress the last, for I believe I have already used it.)  
That same evening, Messieurs avail thems elves of Zéphyr’s ass, and 
Adelaide is condemned to a rude fustigation, after which a hot iron is 
brought very close to the interior of her vagina, to her armpits, and she 
is slightly scorched beneath each nipple. She endures it all like a 
heroine and freq uently invokes God. This further arouses her 
persecutors.    
PART THE FOURTH  
THE 150 MURDEROUS PASSIONS, OR THOSE 
BELONGING TO THE FOURTH CLASS, 
COMPOSING THE TWENTY -EIGHT DAYS OF 
FEBRUARY SPENT IN HEARING THE 
NARRATIONS OF MADAME DESGRANGES; 
INTERSPERSED AMONGST WHICH ARE THE 
SCANDALOUS DOINGS AT THE CHÂTEAU 
DURING THAT MONTH; ALL BEING SET DOWN 
IN THE FORM OF A JOURNAL. (DRAFT)    
Begin by giving a full description of the new situation which exists in 
February; there has been a ra dical change in the appearance of things. 
The four original wives have been repudiated, but the Bishop has 
extended his protection to Julie, whom he keeps near him as a kind of 
servant to wait upon him; Duclos has been allowed to share her quarters 
with Constance, whose fruit Messieurs are eager to keep from spoiling; Aline and Adelaide have been driven out of house and home and now 
sleep amongst the animals intended for their Lordships’ table. The 
sultanas Augustine, Zelmire, Fanny, and Sophie have replace d the wives 
and now fulfill all their functions, to wit: as wipers in the chapel, as 
waitresses at the meals, as couch companions, as Messieurs’ bed 
companions at night. Apart from the fucker, who changes from day to day, Messieurs have:  
The Duc: Augustine , Zéphyr, and Duclos in his bed, together with 
his fucker; he sleeps surrounded by the four of them, and Marie occupies a sofa in his bedchamber;  
Curval: the Président likewise sleeps amidst Adonis, Zelmire, a 
fucker, and Fanchon; his room is otherwise emp ty; 
Durcet sleeps amidst Hyacinthe, Fanny, a fucker, and Martaine (check 
the foregoing),  and he has Louison lie upon a neighboring divan.  
The Bishop sleeps amidst Céladon, Sophie, a fucker, and Julie; 
Thérèse sleeps upon the divan.  
Which reveals that each of the little ménages, Zéphyr and Augustine, 
Adonis and Zelmire, Hyacinthe and Fanny, Céladon and Sophie, all of 
whom are married, belong, husband and wife, to a single master. Only 
four little girls remain in the girls’ harem, and four in the boys’. 
Champ ville sleeps in the girls’ quarters, Desgranges in the boys’ quarters. Aline is in the stable, as we pointed out, and Constance is in Duclos’ 
room, but alone there since Duclos spends every night in the Duc’s bed.  
Dinner is always served by the four sultanas (by, that is to say, the four 
new wives), and supper by the remaining four sultanas; a quatrain always serves coffee; but the quatrains formerly allocated to each niche in the 
auditorium are now reduced in number to one boy and one girl.  
The reader will recall our mention of the pillars in the auditorium; at 
the beginning of each séance, Aline is attached to one of them, Adelaide 
to the other, their buttocks facing out toward the alcoves, and near each 
pillar is a little table covered with assorted punit ive instruments; and so it 
is the two women are at all times ready to receive the lash. Constance 
has permission to sit with the storytellers. Each duenna keeps close to 
her couple, and Julie, completely unclothed, wanders from couch to couch, taking order s and executing them upon the spot. As always, one 
fucker per couch.  
Such is the situation when Desgranges begins her narrations. The 
friends have also ruled, in a special decree, that, during this month, 
Aline, Adelaide, Augustine, and Zelmire shall be su rrendered to 
Messieurs’ brutal passions, and that Messieurs are at liberty, upon the 
prescribed day, either to immolate them privately or to invite whichever of their friends they please to witness the sacrifice; and that with what 
regards Constance, she s hall be employed for the celebration of the final 
week, a full explanation of which shall be given in due time and place. 
Should the Duc and Curval, who by this arrangement are to be made 
widowers, be disposed to take another wife to care for their needs until 
the end of the holiday, they shall be able to do so by making a selection 
from amongst the four remaining sultanas. But the pillars will remain ungarnished when the two women who garnish them now shall have 
been bidden a last farewell.  
Desgranges star ts, and after having reminded her auditors that 
henceforth the tales shall be those of an exclusively murderous character, she says that she will be careful, as their Lordships have enjoined her to 
be, to enter into the most minute details, and above all t o indicate with 
what ordinary caprices these libertine assassins preface their more serious 
exercises; thus, their Lordships will be able to perceive and judge their 
relationships and associations, and to see how an example of simple 
libertinage, rectified  and elaborated by an unmannerly and unprincipled 
individual, may lead straight to murder, and to what kind of murder. 
Then she begins.  
THE 1ST OF FEBRUARY . 1. He used to enjoy amusing himself with a 
beggar  woman  who had not had a bit to eat in three days, and his second 
passion is to leave a woman to die of hunger in a dungeon; he keeps a close 
watch upon her and frigs himself while examining her, but does not discharge 
until the day she perishes.  
2. He maintains her in her prison cell, toying with her for  a long season, 
gradually diminishing her daily portion of food; beforehand, he has her shit, and eats her turd upon a platter.  
3. He formerly liked to suck the mouth and swallow its saliva; in recent 
days he has developed the passion of immuring a woman i n a dungeon with 
food to last no more than a fortnight; on the thirtieth day, he enters her prison 
and frigs himself upon the corpse.  
4. First, he would have her piss, then he would slowly destroy her by 
preventing her from drinking although feeding her al l she wanted to eat.  
5. He would flog, then later kill the woman by depriving her of sleep.  That same evening, Michette, after having eaten a big supper, is hung 
head downward until she has vomited everything upon Curval, who 
stands frigging himself beneat h her and eating the manna that descends 
from on high.  
THE 2ND. 6. His first passion was to have her shit into his mouth, and he 
would eat it as it emerged; nowadays he feeds her a diet of worthless bread and 
cheap wine. A month on this fare and she starve s to death.  
7. He was once a great cunt- fucker; now he gives the woman a venereal 
distemper by injection, but of such virulence she croaks in very short order.  
8. As a youth, he was fond of receiving vomit in his mouth, now, by means 
of a certain decoction , he gives her a deathly fever which results in her speedy 
demise.  
9. He was once wont to gather shit from assholes, presently injects an enema 
containing toxic ingredients dissolved in boiling water or aqua fortis.  
10. Once a famous fustigator, today he binds a woman to a pivot upon 
which she uninterruptedly revolves until dead.  
That evening, an enema of boiling water is given to Rosette the 
moment after the Duc has finished embuggering her.  
THE 3RD. 11. He used to like to slap the whore’s face; as a matur e man, he 
twists her head around until it faces backward. When so adjusted, one may 
simultaneously look at her face and at her buttocks.  
12. Addicted to bestiality as a youngster, he now likes to have a girl 
depucelated by a stallion while he looks on. She  ordinarily dies.  
13. Once an ass- fucker, he now buries the girl up to her waist and 
maintains her thus till the lower half of her body rots.  14. Previously, he was wont to frig her clitoris, and he still does so, but 
more vigorously, employing one of his servants to keep at the work until the 
girl expires.  
15. Gradually perfecting his passion over the years, a fustigator now flogs 
every part of a woman’s body until she perishes.  
That evening, the Duc would have Augustine, endowed with an 
unusually sensitiv e clitoris, frigged thereupon by Duclos and Champville, 
who relieve each other at the post and continue the task until the little lady falls unconscious.  
THE 4TH. 16. His earlier passion was to squeeze the whore’s neck, in later 
years he would tie the girl  by the neck. Before her sits  a sumptuous meal, but to 
reach it she must strangle; otherwise she dies of hunger.  
17. The same man who slew Duclos’ sister and whose taste is to subject the 
flesh to a prolonged mauling, abuses the breasts and buttocks with s uch furious 
violence that his treatment of the whore proves fatal to her.  
18. The man Martaine mentioned on the 20th of January, he who formerly 
adored bleeding women, now kills them by dint of repeated bloodlettings.  
19. He whose passion in times past was to make a naked woman run until 
she dropped from exhaustion, in this age of unbridled libertinage shuts her up 
in a steaming bathhouse where she dies of asphyxiation.  
20. He whom Duclos cited earlier, the gentleman who liked to be wrapped 
in swaddling clo thes and fed whoreshit in a spoon rather than pap, swathes a 
girl so tightly in baby’s blankets that he kills her.  
Shortly before the company moved into the auditorium that 
afternoon, Curval was found embuggering one of the scullery maids. He pays the fine ; the girl is ordered to reappear at the evening’s orgies, where the Duc and the Bishop embugger her in their turn, and she 
receives two hundred lashes from the hand of each of them. She’s a 
strapping country girl, twenty -five, in satisfactory health, and has a fine 
ass. 
THE 5TH. 21. His first passion is for bestiality, his second is to sew the girl 
into an untanned donkey’s skin, her head protruding; he feeds and cares for her 
until the animal’s skin shrinks and crushes her to death.  
22. He of whom Martain e spoke on the 15th of January and who liked to 
hang a girl for his amusement, currently amuses himself by hanging her by her feet until the blood rushing to her head kills her.  
23. Duclos’ libertine of the 27th of November who liked to besot his whore, 
today inserts a funnel into her mouth and floods her with liquids till she dies 
therefrom.  
24. Once he was wont to mistreat nipples, but has progressed since then and 
now buckles a sort of small iron pot over each breast and lowers her over a stove; the iron  heats, and she is allowed to perish thus in frightful pain.  
25. His whole delight used to consist in watching a woman swim, but he 
now casts her into a pond and fishes her out half -drowned, then hangs her by 
the feet to encourage the water to drain out of  her. Once she has returned to her 
senses, into the pond she goes again, and so on and so forth, till she gives up the 
ghost.  
Upon that day and at the same hour, another kitchen servant is found 
being embuggered, this time by the Duc; he pays the fine, the  servant is 
summoned to the orgies, where everyone cavorts with her, Durcet 
making good use of her mouth, the others of her bum, and even of her 
cunt, for she is a virgin, and she is condemned to receive two hundred lashes from each of her employers. She i s a girl of eighteen, tall and well 
made, her hair is auburn in color, and she owns a very fair ass.  
That same evening, Curval utters the opinion that it is a matter of 
extreme urgency that Constance be bled again on account of her 
pregnancy; the Duc embug gers her, and Curval bleeds her while 
Augustine frigs his prick against Zelmire’s buttocks and while someone else fucks Zelmire. Upon discharging, he executes the puncture; his aim is true.  
THE 6TH. 26. As a young man he used to kick a woman in the ass, 
tumbling her into a brazier, whence she would emerge before suffering 
excessively. He has lately refined this stunt, now obliges a girl to stand upright 
between two blazing fires: one cooks her in front, the other behind; and there 
she remains until the fat on her body melts.  
Desgranges announces that she is going to describe murders which, 
bringing on a prompt death, cause very little suffering.  
27. In former times he would impede respiration by constricting the neck 
with his hands or by blocking the nose an d mouth, but these days he deposits 
the whore between four mattresses and she suffocates.  
28. He of whom Martaine said a few words and who used to allow his 
victim a choice from among three manners of dying (see the 14th of January) 
has of late begun to bl ow out the whore’s brains, denying her any say in the 
matter; he embuggers, and upon discharging, pulls the trigger.  
29. The man Champville referred to on the 22nd of December as the 
libertine who made the girl dance with the cat, presently flings the whor e from 
the top of a tower. She lands on sharp gravel. He discharges upon hearing her land.  30. That gentleman who liked to throttle his partner while embuggering 
her, and whom Martaine described on the 6th of January, has advanced to the 
stage at which, as  he embuggers her, he slips a black silk cord about her neck 
and strangles her while discharging; this delight, says Desgranges, is one of the 
most exquisite a libertine can procure himself.  
Upon that day, Messieurs celebrate the festival of the fourteenth  
week, and, in the guise of a woman, Curval becomes Bum -Cleaver’s 
wife, and, as a man, takes Adonis to be his helpmeet; ’tis  not till then 
that child is depucelated, and the event occurs very publicly, while Bum -
Cleaver is fucking the Président.  
Messieurs besot themselves at supper. And they flog Zelmire and 
Augustine about the loins, the buttocks, the thighs, the belly, the cunt, and the groin, then Curval has Zelmire fucked by Adonis, his new wife, and embuggers both of them one after the other.  
THE 7TH. 31. He once liked to fuck a drowsy woman; he does much better 
now: he kills her with a strong dose of opium and encunts her during her death -sleep.  
32. The same roué she referred to very recently, and who subjects the whore 
to a series of duckings, has sti ll another passion: tying a stone to her neck, he 
drowns the woman.  
33. Whereas once he was content to slap her face, now he carries matters 
further: he pours molten lead into her ear while she is asleep.  
34. He was fond of whipping her face; Champville sp oke of him on the 
30th of December  (verify that); but now he dispatches the girl with a quick 
hammer blow upon the temple.  35. This libertine would previously allow a candle to burn out in a 
woman’s anus; today, he attaches her to a lightning rod during a thunderstorm 
and awaits a fortuitous stroke.  
36. A sometime fustigator. He has her bend over with her behind facing the 
muzzle of a small piece of artillery. The ball enters her ass.  
That day ’tis  the Bishop they discover with his prick lodged in the 
third  kitchen servant’s asshole. He pays the fine, the Duc and Curval 
embugger and cunt -fuck her, for she is also a virgin, then she is given a 
total of eight hundred stripes, two hundred by each friend. She is Swiss, 
nineteen, very fair of skin, very plump, and has a splendid ass. The cooks 
complain and say that the service will not be able to continue any longer 
if Messieurs go on fussing about with the help, and the society agrees to 
a truce extending until March.  
Rosette loses a finger that evening, and the wound is cauterized with 
fire. She is sandwiched between Curval and the Duc during the operation: one fucks her ass, the other her cunt. Adonis’ ass is made generally available that same evening; and so it is that the Duc cunt -
fucks one servant and Rosette  at the orgies and ass -fucks the same 
servant, ass -fucks Rosette too, and Adonis. He is tired.  
THE 8TH. 37. His whole delight once lay in beating a woman’s entire body 
with a bull’s pizzle; ’twas  to him Martaine alluded as the man who strained 
all four of his victim’s limbs on the rack and broke but one of them. He likes 
now thoroughly to break the woman on the wheel, but he chokes her to death 
when he has finished exercising her.  
38. Martaine’s gentleman who would feign a decapitation and have the 
woman sn atched from beneath the blade at the last moment, now severs her 
head in all good faith. He discharges as the blow falls. He frigs himself. 39. Martaine’s libertine of the 30th of January who was wont to perform 
an extensive scarification, now consigns his victims to perish in dungeons.  
40. He used to be a whipper of pregnant women’s bellies, has latterly 
perfected that by causing an enormous weight to fall on the pregnant woman’s 
belly, thereby crushing her and her fruit at one stroke.  
41. Formerly, he was  known to be fond of the sight of a girl’s bare neck, 
which he would squeeze and molest somewhat; that mild passion has been replaced by the insertion of a pin in a certain spot upon the woman’s neck. The 
pin kills her at once.  
42. At the beginning he woul d gently burn various parts of the body with a 
candle flame, more recently he has begun to hurl women into a glowing furnace where they are consumed instantly.  
Durcet, his prick very stiff and who during the storytelling has 
ventured forth twice to flog Ad elaide awaiting him at her pillar, proposes 
to lay her lengthwise in the fire, and after she has had sufficient time to 
quake over an idea Messieurs would be nothing loath to put into 
execution, they burn her nipples for the sake of their convenience; 
Durc et, her husband, burns one, her father, Curval, burns the other. 
This exciting operation causes both to discharge.  
THE 9TH. 43. In his young years a pin -pricker, he has got himself a more 
formidable weapon: discharges while thrice driving a dagger into the  woman’s 
heart.  
44. He used to adore burning gunpowder in the cunt, but has since 
improved his passion: he attaches a slender but attractive girl to a large rocket, 
the fuse is ignited, the rocket ascends, then returns to earth with the girl still attached . 45. The same personage who put gunpowder in all the orifices of a woman’s 
body, now wedges cartridges into them; they explode simultaneously, sending 
the members flying in every direction.  
46. First passion: he enjoyed secreting an emetic in the girl’s f ood, 
unbeknownst to her; his second passion: he mixes a certain powder with her snuff, or sprinkles it on some flowers, she inhales and straightway falls dead.  
47. First passion: he would flog her breasts and neck; refinement thereof: he 
aims a blow of a c rowbar at her throat, it fells her forever.  
48. Duclos spoke of him on the 27th of November, Martaine on the 14th of 
January  (verify the dates): the whore enters and shits before the rake, he scolds 
her; brandishing a whip, he pursues her, she thinks to ta ke refuge in a loft. A 
door opens, she spies a little stairway, believes she will be safe, rushes up the 
steps, but one of them gives way and she plunges into a large vat of boiling water; she dies, scalded, drowned, asphyxiated. His tastes are previously to 
have the woman shit and to lash her while she is doing so.  
Curval had solicited and obtained shit from Zelmire that morning; 
now, directly the aforementioned tale is concluded, the Duc demands 
further shit from her. She cannot produce any; she is prompt ly 
condemned to have her ass pricked with a golden needle until it is 
covered with blood; in that it is the Duc whose interests have suffered as 
a result of her refusal, he is the one who recovers damages.  
Curval requests shit of Zéphyr; the latter replies , saying that the Duc 
had him shit that morning. This the Duc denies, Duclos is called to give evidence, she supports Blangis’ contention even though it is false. 
Consequently, Curval has the right to punish Zéphyr, despite the fact he 
is the Duc’s bardash , just as the Duc has punished Zelmire, who is 
Curval’s wife. The Président flogs Zéphyr until the lad streams blood, then tweaks his nose six times; the tweaks fetch forth more blood, and 
that makes the Duc roar with laughter.  
THE 10TH. Desgranges says th at she is now going to discuss murders 
of imposture and duplicity in which the manner is of principal 
significance; that is to say, the murder itself is merely incidental. 
Wherewith, says she, poisonings will be presented first.  
49. A man whose caprice con sisted in bum -fuckery and in no other kind, 
now envenoms all his wives; he is presently on his twenty -second. Never does 
he fuck them save in the ass, nor have they ever been deflowered otherwise.  
50. A bugger invites a number of friends to a banquet, and with each 
succeeding course a few of them are stricken with stomach cramps which prove 
fatal.  
51. Duclos spoke of him on the 26th of November, Martaine on the 10th of 
January; he is a bugger, pretends that it is relief he is giving the poor, distributes fo od, but ’tis  poisoned.  
52. A treacherous bugger regularly employs a drug which, sprinkled on the 
ground, very wonderfully kills whosoever walks thereupon; he sprinkles it about rather frequently, and over wide areas. 
53. A bugger, equally skilled in alchem y, uses another substance which 
causes death after inconceivable torture; the death throes last a good two weeks, and no doctor has ever been able to diagnose or treat the ailment. He takes the 
keenest pleasure in paying you a visit while you are in the to ils. 
54. A sodomizer of men and women makes use of yet another powder which 
deprives you of your senses and renders you as if dead. And such you are 
believed to be, you are buried, and full of despair, you die in your coffin, into 
which you have no sooner been placed than you regain consciousness. He endeavors to find the exact place you have been buried, to place an ear to the 
ground and listen for a few screams; if indeed he hears your cries, ’tis  enough to 
make him swoon with pleasure. He thuswise slew p art of his family.  
While joking and making merry that evening, Messieurs give Julie a 
powder concealed in her food, which causes her frightful cramps; they 
advise her that she is poisoned, she believes it, she wails, is beside 
herself. While watching her c onvulsions, the Duc has Augustine frig 
him directly opposite Julie Augustine has the great misfortune of 
allowing the prepuce to slip back over the Duc’s glans, and that is 
something which displeases the Duc extremely: he was just about to 
discharge, the g irl’s carelessness prevents it. He declares he is going to 
cut off one of that buggeress ’ fingers and, as good as his word, does so, 
slicing a digit from the hand that failed him, and while cutting, he has 
his daughter Julie, still persuaded she is poisone d, crawl up to him and 
complete his discharge. Julie is cured that same evening.  
THE 11TH. 55. A consummate bugger would frequently dine at the home of 
friends or acquaintances and would never fail to poison the individual his host 
cherished most dearly am ongst all living creatures. He employed a powder 
which finally slew after causing two days of atrocious agony.  
56. An erstwhile breast -abuser has perfected his passion: he poisons infants 
being suckled by their nurses.  
57. He once used to love to receive b ack into his mouth milk enemas he had 
injected into his partner’s rectum; his later passion: he administers toxic injections which kill while causing horrible spasms and colics.  58. A crafty bugger of whom she will have occasion to say more on the 13th 
and the 26th, used to love to set fire to poor -houses, and would always see to it 
that a quantity of persons were consumed, above all children.  
59. Another bugger liked to cause women to die in childbirth; he would 
come to pay his respects, bringing along a p owder whose odor would cause 
spasms and convulsions ending in death.  
60. The man to whom Duclos referred during her twenty -eighth evening 
enjoys watching a woman bear a child; he murders it immediately it emerges 
from the womb and within full view of the m other, and does so while feigning 
to caress it.  
That evening, Adelaide is first dealt a hundred lashes by each friend, 
and then, when she is well bloodied, shit is demanded of her; she gave 
some that morning to Curval, who swears ’tis  not so. Consequently,  they 
burn her two breasts, the palm of each hand, spill drops of molten 
sealing wax upon her thighs and belly, fill her navel therewith, burn her 
pubic hair after having doused it with cognac. The Duc attempts to pick a quarrel with Zelmire, and the Prési dent severs a finger from each of 
her hands. Augustine is scourged about the cunt and asshole.  
THE 12TH. Messieurs assemble in the morning and decide that the 
four governesses, who are no longer of much use to the society and 
whose functions the four story tellers shall henceforth be perfectly able to 
carry out, may just as well provide the society with a little amusement; 
Messieurs therefore decree that the elders shall be martyrized one after 
another, the first sacrifice being scheduled for the evening of that same 
day. The four storytellers are invited to replace the elders; they accept upon condition they shall suffer no ill -treatment. Messieurs promise to 
subject them to none.  61. The three friends, d’Aucourt, the abbot, and Desprès, of whom Duclos 
spoke  on the 12th of November, are now living abroad and still enjoying each 
other’s company, and this is one of their common passions: they require a 
woman whose pregnancy is in its eighth or begun its ninth month, they open her belly, snatch out the child, bu rn it before the mother’s eyes, and in its place 
substitute a package containing sulphur and quicksilver, which they set afire, then stitch the belly up again, leaving the mother thus to perish in the midst of incredible agonies, while they look on and hav e themselves frigged by the girl 
they have with them.  (Verify the girl’s name.)  
62. He was fond of depucelating, has gradually broadened his scope of 
activity: he has a great number of children by several women, then, when they 
reach the age of five or six , he depucelates them, boys and girls alike, and 
directly he has fucked them, throws them into a blazing oven. Or he sometimes 
throws them in at the same moment he discharges.  
63. The man Duclos mentioned on the 27th of November, Martaine on the 
15th of Ja nuary, and she herself on the 5th of February, whose taste was to 
play at hanging, to see hanged, etc., this same fellow, I say, hides some of his 
personal effects in his domestics’ wardrobes and declares he has been robbed. He 
strives to have his servants hanged, and if he succeeds goes to watch the 
spectacle; if not, he locks them in a room and strangles them to death. While 
operating, he discharges.  
64. An inveterate shit -lover, he of whom Duclos spoke on the 14th of 
November, has a specially prepared co mmode at his home; he engages his 
intended victim to sit down upon it, and once the victim is seated, the seat 
buckles, gives way, and precipitates the sitter into a very deep ditch filled with 
shit, in which environment she is left to die.  65. A man to wh om Martaine made reference and who would amuse 
himself watching a girl fall from a ladder, has perfected his passion thus  (but 
find out which man):  
He situates the girl upon a little trestle on the edge of a deep ditch filled 
with water; on the farther sid e of it is a wall which seems to be all the more 
inviting, what for the ladder leaning against it. But to reach the ladder she 
must cross the moat, and she becomes all the more willing to spring into the water as the fire burning behind the trestle moves g radually closer to her. If she 
hesitates too long, the fire will reach her, consume her, and as she does not know how to swim, she will be drowned if she plunges into the water. While she is considering what to do, the fire approaches, and she finally elec ts to 
struggle with a different element and endeavor to get to the wall. It frequently happens that she drowns; if so, the game is over. But if by good fortune she reaches the other bank and then the ladder, and starts to climb it, toward the 
top there is a rung which breaks beneath her weight and she drops into a hole 
covered over with a thin layer of earth, and the hole contains a bed of live coals 
upon which she perishes. Hard by the scene, the libertine observes it with the 
keenest interest, frigging hi mself industriously.  
66. The same man Duclos spoke of on the 29th of November, the same who 
bumwise  depucelated Martaine when a little girl of  five, and also the same 
with whom Desgranges announces she will conclude her narrations  (the hell 
episode), this individual, I say, embuggers the prettiest girl of sixteen or 
eighteen the procuress can find for him. Sensing his crisis about to arrive, he releases a spring, upon the bare and completely unadorned neck of the girl 
descends a machine furnished with steel  teeth; the machine begins to move 
laterally and gradually saws through the pinioned neck while the libertine 
occupies himself with completing his discharge. Which always takes a very long 
time.  That very evening Messieurs discover the intrigue involving 
Augustine and one of the subaltern fuckers; he has not yet fucked her, 
but to attain his ends has suggested that they both escape from the 
castle, and he has outlined to her a very easy way to do so. Augustine confesses that she was about to grant him what he sought from her in 
order to save herself from a place where she believes her life to be in 
danger. ’Tis Fanchon who discovers and reports everything. The 
traitorous quadrumvirate leap upon the fucker without warning, bind 
him hand and foot, and take him  down to the cellars, where the Duc 
embuggers him with extreme vigor and without pomade, while the 
Président saws through his neck and the other two apply red- hot irons 
to all parts of his body.  
This scene transpires directly after dinner is over and hence  coffee is 
omitted that day; the work completed, everyone repairs to the 
auditorium as usual, then to supper, and amongst themselves Messieurs 
debate whether, in return for having disclosed the conspiracy, they ought not accord Fanchon a reprieve, for their decision that morning was to 
maltreat her the same evening. The Bishop declares himself against 
sparing her, and says that it would be unworthy of them to yield to the 
sentiment of gratitude, and that, for his part, he will always be seen to 
favor any de cision likely to afford the society one pleasure more, just as 
he will always vote against any motion apt to deprive it of a pleasure. 
And so, after having punished Augustine for lending herself to the subversive scheme, first by obliging her to watch her lover’s execution, 
then by embuggering her and making her believe her head would be cut 
off as well, next by actually pulling out two of her teeth, an operation 
performed by the Duc while Curval was embuggering that beautiful girl, 
finally by giving her a sound whipping, after all that, I say, Fanchon is led into the arena, made to shit, given a hundred lashes by each of the 
friends, and then the Duc deftly shaves off her left nipple. She raises a 
storm, criticizing their behavior toward her and describing it as unjust. 
“Were it just,” says the Duc, wiping his razor, “it would surely fail to give us an erection.” Whereupon they dress the old whore’s wounds, eager to 
preserve her for further ordeals.  
Their Lordships perceive that indeed there had been faint b ut definite 
rebellious stirrings amongst the subaltern fuckers; the prompt sacrifice of 
one of them has, however, thoroughly quelled their murmurs. Like 
Fanchon, the three other duennas are divested of all responsibility, removed from office, and replaced by the four storytellers and Julie. 
They tremble, do the old dames; but by what shifts are they to escape their fate?  
THE 13TH. 67. A great connoisseur of the ass, he declares his love for a girl 
and, having arranged a boating party, lures her upon the wat er in a small 
boat, the which has been prepared for the outing, springs a leak, founders; the 
girl is drowned. He sometimes pursues his objective by different means: will, 
for example, lead a girl out upon a high balcony, have her lean upon the 
railing, wh ich gives way; and once again the girl dies.  
68. A man, while making his apprenticeship in life, was content first to 
whip and then to embugger; now, having reached a mature age, entices the 
girl to enter a specially prepared room; a trap door yields benea th her step, she 
falls into a cellar where the rake awaits her; he plunges a knife into her breasts, 
her cunt, and into her asshole as she lies stunned by her fall. Next, he casts her, 
dead or still alive, into another cellar, over which a stone drops into  place; she 
tumbles upon a heap of other corpses, and she expires in a great fit if life has 
not already departed her sore- beset frame. And he is very careful to administer delicate stabs, for he would prefer that she live a little and finally perish in th e 
cellar mentioned latterly. Prior to all this, he of course embuggers and flogs her 
and discharges; ’tis  coolly and with utmost method he proceeds to her undoing.  
69. A bugger has the girl mount astride an untamed, unbroken horse which 
unseats her, drags her along a rocky terrain, and finally pitches her over a precipice.  
70. Martaine’s hero of the 18th of January whose juvenile passion was to 
distribute little mounds of gunpowder upon the girl’s body, has made significant progress. He lays the girl in a s pecial bed; when properly tucked in, 
the bed gives way, dropping her into a large brazier of live coals, but she is 
able to scramble out of it; however, he is standing by and, as she repeats her 
attempts to escape the fire, he drives her back, wielding a p itchfork and with it 
aiming stout blows at her belly.  
71. The gentleman she mentioned on the 11th, who likes to burn down 
poorhouses, endeavors to lure a beggar, whether a man or a woman, from out 
of one and into his own home, upon the pretense of bestowin g charity; he 
embuggers his victim, then breaks his back and leaves him thus discomfited to 
die in a dungeon.  
72. He who was wont to defenestrate a woman, hurling her upon a dung 
heap, the same man of whom Martaine spoke, by way of second passion executes the following one: he allows the girl to sleep in a room she is 
acquainted with and whose window she knows to be not far above the ground; 
she is given opium, when in a deep slumber she is conveyed to another 
chamber, identical with the first but having a window high above the ground 
which, on this side of the house, is strewn with sharp rocks. Next, the libertine 
enters where she lies sleeping, makes a dreadful noise, terrifies her; she is 
informed that she is about to die. Knowing the drop from the window  to the ground to be short, she leaps through it, but falls thirty feet and lands upon the 
murderous rocks, killing herself. No one has so much as laid a finger upon her.  
In the character of a woman, that great histrionic, the Bishop, marries 
Antinoüs, whose role is that of a husband, and also weds Céladon, whom he takes to be his wife, and ’tis  that evening the child is 
embuggered for the first time.  
This ceremony celebrates the festival of the fifteenth week; to 
complete the holiday, the prelate wishes to  expose Aline to some severe 
vexations, for his libertine rage against her has been quietly but steadily mounting: she is hanged, then quickly cut down, but while seeing her 
however briefly aloft, everyone discharges. Durcet opens her veins, this 
treatment restores her to life; the next day she appears none the worse 
for wear, but suspension has added an inch to her height; she relates 
what she experienced during the ordeal. The Bishop, for whom 
everything is an occasion of jollity and everyone the object of game that 
day, cuts one of old Louison’s nipples clean off her breast; whereupon the other two duennas see very clearly what their fate is to be.  
THE 14TH. 73. A man whose simple taste was to flog a girl, perfects it by 
every day removing morsels of fles h the size of a pea from the girl’s body, but 
her wounds are not dressed, and thus she perishes over a low fire, as it were.  
Desgranges announces that she will now deal with exceedingly painful 
murders wherein ’tis  the extreme cruelty which comprises the m ain 
element; Messieurs more strongly than ever urge her to furnish abundant 
details.  74. He who was fond of letting blood daily relieves his victim of a half 
ounce of it, continuing till she is dead. Messieurs greet this example with 
hearty applause.  
75. He who was wont to prick the ass with many pins every day 
administers a more or less superficial gash with a poignard. The blood is stanched, but the wound is not treated, neither does it mend, and thus ’tis  a 
slow death she dies. A fustigator (75) quietly a nd slowly saws off all four limbs, 
one after the other.  
76. The Marquis de Mesanges, of whom Duclos spoke in connection with 
the shoemaker Petignon’s daughter, bought by the Marquis from Duclos, and 
whose first passion was to undergo four hours of flogging  without discharging, 
for a second passion places a little girl in the hands of a giant fellow who holds 
the child by the head over a large charcoal brazier which burns her very slowly; the victims must be virgins.  
77. His first passion: little by little to burn the breasts and buttocks with 
the flame of a match; his second: over every part of the girl’s body to plant a forest of sulphur- coated slivers, which he lights one by one. He watches her die 
in this way. 
“Nor is there any more painful way to die,” observes the Duc, who 
then confesses to having surrendered himself to this infamous pastime, 
and to having discharged vigorously thanks to it. They say that the 
patient lives six hours, sometimes eight.  
Céladon’s ass is made generally available that evening ; the Duc and 
Curval indulge themselves heavily. Constance’s pregnancy is still on the 
Président’s mind; he suggests that she be bled, and bleeds her himself 
while discharging in Céladon’s ass, then he lops off one of Thérèse’s nipples while embuggering Ze lmire, and the Duc sodomizes the duenna 
during the amputation.  
THE 15TH. 78. Once beguiled by the charms of a mouth to suck and saliva 
to swallow, he is now of sterner stuff: every day he inserts a funnel into the 
girl’s mouth and pours a small dose of mol ten lead down her throat; she gives 
up the ghost on the ninth day.  
79. First a finger -twister, he currently breaks all her limbs, tears out her 
tongue, gouges out her eyes, and leaves her thus to live, diminishing her 
sustenance day by day.  
80. A perpetrat or of sacrilege, the second one Martaine mentioned on the 
3rd of January, he secures a beautiful youth to a tall cross, binding him with cords and leaving him there as food for ravens.  
81. An armpit -sniffer and -fucker, to whom Duclos alluded, binds a 
woma n hand and foot and hangs her by a rope looped under her arms; he goes 
every day to prick some part of her body so that the blood will attract flies; her 
death is by slow degrees.  
82. A passionate admirer of asses rectifies his worship: he now seals a girl  in 
an underground cave where she has food to last  three days; before leaving her, 
he inflicts several wounds upon her body, thuswise to render her death more painful. He wishes to have them virgins and spends a week embracing their 
asses before organizing  their destruction.  
83. Formerly he loved to fuck very youthful mouths and asses; his later 
improvement consists in snatching out the heart of a living girl, widening the 
space that organ occupied, fucking the warm hole, replacing the heart in that 
pool of  blood and fuck, sewing up the wound, and leaving the girl to her fate, 
without help of any kind. In which case the wait is not long.  Still wroth with the lovely Constance, Curval maintains that there is 
no reason under the sun why one cannot successfully bear a child even 
though one has a broken limb, and therefore they fracture that unlucky 
creature’s arm the same evening. Durcet slices off one of Marie’s nipples after she has been well warmed by the lash and made copiously to shit.  
THE 16TH. 84. A fustig ator refines his passion: he learns and then practices 
the art of gently removing flesh from bones; he then extracts the marrow, usually by sucking it out, and pours molten lead into the cavity.  
At this point the Duc loudly exclaims that he’ll not fuck another ass 
while he lives if that isn’t the very ordeal he has had in mind for his beloved Augustine; that poor girl, whom Blangis has been embuggering 
for some time, utters cries and sheds a torrent of tears. And as thanks to 
her misbehavior she interferes with his discharge and frustrates it effectively, he withdraws, takes hold of his engine in one hand, and 
while with the other he gives her a dozen slaps which resound through 
that wing of the castle, he manages his discharge very satisfactorily by himself . 
85. A bugger uses an ingenious machine to chop the girl into small pieces: 
this is a Chinese torture.  
86. Weary of his early fondness for girls’ pucelages, his latest passion is to 
impale a girl upon the point of a sharp pickaxe introduced  into her cunt;  there 
she sits, as if upon a horse, he ties a cannon ball to each of her legs, the pick works deeper, and she is left to her own devices and a slow death.  
87. A fustigator flays the girl thrice over; he soaks her fourth layer of skin 
with a devouring esch arotic which brings about death accompanied by hideous 
agonies.  88. His first passion was to sever a finger; his second is to pluck up some 
flesh with a pair of red -hot tongs, to cut off the flesh with a pair of scissors, 
then to burn the wound. He is quite apt to spend as long as four or five days 
whittling away a girl’s body piecemeal, and she ordinarily dies while the cruel operation is still advancing.  
Sophie and Céladon have been found amusing themselves together 
and are punished that evening; both are  whipped over their entire bodies 
by the Bishop, whose chattels they are. Sophie loses two fingers to the 
shears, Céladon as many; but he recovers very quickly. The Bishop is no 
less eager to use them in his pleasures, however they be maimed.  
Fanchon retur ns to the center of the stage. After having been beaten 
with a bull’s pizzle, the soles of her feet are burned, each thigh, before and behind, is burned also, her forehead too, and each hand as well, and Messieurs extract all her remaining teeth. The Duc’s  prick is almost 
continually wedged into her ass throughout this lengthy operation.  
Mention that it has been prescribed by law that a subject’s buttocks 
shall be left intact until the day the said subject reaches the end of his 
career.  
THE 17TH. 89. Martai ne’s gentleman of the 30th of January and the same 
one she herself described on the 5th of February, pares away a girl’s breasts and buttocks, eats them, and upon her wounds puts plasters which so violently burn 
the flesh that they are her undoing. He also  forces her to eat her own flesh, 
which he has had grilled.  
90. A bugger cooks up a little girl in a double boiler.  
91. A bugger: he has her roasted alive on a spit directly after embuggering 
her. 92. A man whose initial passion was to have little girls and boys 
embuggered in his presence by massive and ponderous pricks, impales the girl, 
a spear in her ass, and leaves her thus to die while he studies her contortions.  
93. Another bugger: attaches a woman to a wheel, it is then set in motion 
and, without hav ing done her any previous harm, he allows her to die a very 
pretty death.  
That evening, the Bishop, his spirits in a great ferment, wishes to have 
Aline tormented, his rage against her has reached its fever pitch. She makes her appearance naked, he has her  shit and embuggers her, then, 
without discharging, he withdraws in a towering fury from that 
enchanting ass and injects a rinse of boiling water into it, obliging her to 
squirt it out at once, while it is still boiling hot, upon Thérèse’s face. 
After that , Messieurs hack off all the fingers and toes Aline has left, 
break both her arms and burn them with red- hot pokers. She is next 
flogged, beaten, and slapped, then the Bishop, still further aroused, cuts off one of her nipples, and discharges.  
Wherewith th ey transfer their attentions to Thérèse, the interior of 
her vagina is seared, her nostrils, tongue, feet, and hands are all burned 
too; then she is given six hundred lashes with a bull’s pizzle. Out come 
the rest of her teeth, fire is introduced into her throat. A witness to these 
harsh proceedings, Augustine falls to weeping; the Duc lashes her belly 
and cunt until he has drawn a suitable amount of blood therefrom.  
THE 18TH. 94. A flesh- scarifier in his early days, his adult entertainment 
consists in quar tering girls by bending four saplings, attaching an arm or leg 
to each, and releasing the trees, which spring back erect.  95. A fustigator suspends her from a machine which lowers a girl into and 
immediately lifts her out of a fire, then repeats the operat ion until there is very 
little left of the patient.  
96. He once loved to extinguish candles by snuffing them out upon flesh; 
today, he envelopes her in sulphur and uses her for a torch, being careful to 
prevent the fumes from choking her.  
97. A sodomist: r ips the intestines from a young boy and a young girl, puts 
the boy’s into the girl, inserts the girl’s into the boy’s body, stitches up the incisions, ties them back to back to a pillar which supports them both, and he 
watches them perish.  
98. A man who wa s fond of inflicting light burns, improves his passion: he 
now roasts his victim upon a grill, turning him over and over again.  
Michette is, that evening, exposed to the libertines’ fury; all four begin 
by whipping her, then each tears out one of her teeth , they cut off four 
fingers (each friend amputates one), her thighs are burned in four places, two in front and two behind, the Duc manhandles one of her breasts 
until it is truly unrecognizable, sodomizing Giton in the meantime.  
Louison is next on the bil l of fare; she is made to shit, she is given 
eight hundred strokes with the bull’s pizzle, she is divested of all her 
teeth, her tongue is burned, as is her asshole, her vagina, and her 
remaining nipple, and so are six places upon her thighs.  
When everyone  has retired to bed for the night, the Bishop goes in 
search of his brother, they wake Desgranges and Duclos, and the four of them take Aline down into the cellars; the Bishop embuggers her, the 
Duc embuggers her, they pronounce the death sentence, and by means 
of excessive torments which last until daybreak, they execute it. Upon 
returning, they exchange words of unqualified praise for these two storytellers and advise their colleagues to undertake no serious projects 
without their help.  
THE 19TH. 99. He places the woman so that the base of her spine bears 
upon the sharpened head of a tall post, her four limbs are held in the air only 
by light cords; the effects of her suffering make the lecher laugh incontinently, 
the torture is frightful.  
100. A man who u sed to enjoy cutting small steaks from the girl’s rump has 
become absolutely a butcher: he has the girl sandwiched  between two heavy 
planks, then slowly and carefully sawed in two.  
101. An embuggerer of both sexes has brother and sister fetched in; he 
declares to the brother that he is about to die a horrible death, and shows the 
young man all the deployed tackle he proposes to use; however, the libertine 
continues, he will save the brother’s life if he will fuck his sister and strangle her at once. The young man agrees, and while he fucks his sister, the libertine 
embuggers now one of them, now the other. Then the brother, fearing for his 
life, deprives his sister of hers, and the moment he completes that operation, both he and his dead sister tumble throug h a trap door into a capacious 
charcoal brazier, wherein the libertine watches them be consumed.  
102. A bugger compels a father to fuck his daughter in his presence. Next, 
the father holds the daughter, the bugger sodomizes her; after which he informs 
the father that the girl absolutely has to perish, but that he has the alternatives 
of killing her himself by strangling her, which will cause her little suffering, or, 
in that other case, if he prefers not to kill his daughter, then he, the libertine, 
will do  the work, but the father shall have to witness it all, and his child’s 
agonies will be atrocious.  
Rather than see her undergo frightful tortures, the father decides to kill his 
daughter with a noose of black silk, but while he is preparing to dispatch her , he is seized, bound, and before his eyes his child is flayed alive, then rolled 
upon burning iron nails, then cast into a brazier, and the father is strangled; 
this, says the libertine, is to teach him a lesson not to be so eager to choke the 
life out of  his own children, for ’tis  barbaric. Afterward, he is dumped into the 
same brazier wherein his daughter perished.  
103. A great devotee of asses and of the lash brings together mother and 
daughter. He tells the girl that he is going to kill her mother if s he, the girl, 
does not consent to the sacrifice of both her hands; the little one agrees, they are 
severed at the wrist. Whereupon these two creatures are separated; a rope 
suspended from the ceiling is slipped around the girl’s neck, she stands upon a stool; another cord runs from the stool into the next room and the mother  is 
requested to hold the end. She is then invited to tug on the cord: she pulls it without knowing what she is doing, she is led directly into the first room to contemplate her work, and during that moment of her keenest distress, she is 
smitten down by a saber blow aimed at her head from behind.  
Jealous of the pleasure the two brothers had the night before, Durcet, 
that evening, is moved to suggest that they vex Adelaide, whose turn, he  
assures the society, is soon to come. And so Curval, her father, and 
Durcet, her husband, worry her thighs with white -hot tongs while the 
Duc’s unlubricated member sounds her ass. The tip of her tongue is pierced, the ends of both her ears are shorn away,  with the aid of 
instruments Messieurs dispossess her of four teeth, and then she is given 
a savage whipping. That same evening, the Bishop bleeds Sophie while 
her dearly beloved friend, Adelaide, watches the blood issue from the 
child’s veins; the fountains are kept turned on until Sophie loses 
consciousness; as he bleeds her, the Bishop embuggers her, remaining in 
her ass throughout the operation.  While Curval is sodomizing him, Narcisse loses a pair of fingers, then 
Marie is hailed into court, red -hot ir ons are thrust into her cunt and 
asshole, more irons are applied to six places upon her thighs, upon her 
clitoris, her tongue, upon her one remaining breast, and out come the remainder of her teeth.  
THE 20TH. 104. Champville’s of the 5th of December, the m an who was 
wont to have the mother prostitute her son and hold him while he embuggered the lad, improves his taste by bringing the mother and son together. He tells 
the mother that he is about to kill her, but will spare her if she will murder her 
son. In case she refuses to do so, he slits the boy’s throat before the woman’s eyes. Or if she consents: then she is bound to her son’s dead body and left quietly to 
meditate and finally to die.  
105. A very incestuous personage assembles two sisters after having 
embuggered both of them; he binds them to a machine, each has a knife in her 
hand: the machine is set in motion, the girls are brought suddenly together and 
mutually kill each other.  
106. Another devotee of incest requires a mother and her four children. 
They are locked into a room; he observes them through a small barred window. 
He gives them nothing to eat in order to study the effects of famine upon this woman, and to discover which of her children she will eat first.  
107. Champville’s of the 29th of Dec ember, who liked to flog pregnant 
women, calls for a mother and daughter, both of whom must be gravid: they are tied to a pair of steel plates one set above the other; the women face one 
another; the machine starts, the jaws of the vise close with great sp eed and 
power, the two women are ground to dust, together with their fruit.  
108. A very buggerish gentleman entertains himself in the following 
manner: he assembles lover and mistress:  “There is in all the world but one person who stands in the way of your  
happiness,” says he, taking the lover aside; “I am going to put that individual 
in your power.”  
And he leads him into an obscurely lit chamber containing a bed; upon it 
someone lies asleep. Greatly aroused, the young man takes dagger in hand and 
stabs his enemy. When he has had done, he is permitted to recognize his 
mistress’ dead body: ’twas  she he slew; he kills himself in despair, or if he does 
not, the libertine kills him with a shot from a rifle, fired at a distance, not 
daring to enter the room with the furious young man who still has a weapon 
in his hand. Previously, he fucked the youth and his beloved too, they singly 
yielded to him in the hope he would help them and bring them together, it is 
after having enjoyed them he rids the world of them.  
In celebration of the sixteenth week, Durcet, as a woman, marries 
Invictus, who enacts a masculine role; and as a man he takes Hyacinthe 
to be his wife; the ceremonies are performed that evening and, by way of 
festivity, Durcet wishes to torment Fanny, his fe minine wife. 
Consequently, her arms are burned, so are her thighs in six separate 
places, two teeth are extracted from her mouth, she is flogged; 
Hyacinthe, who loves her and who is her husband thanks to the 
voluptuous arrangements hitherto described, Hyac inthe, I say, is obliged 
to shit into Fanny’s mouth, and she to eat the turd.  
The Duc pulls out one of Augustine’s teeth and immediately 
afterward fucks her in the mouth. Fanchon reappears, she is bled, and 
while blood flows from her arm, her arm is broken ; next, they remove 
her toenails and sever the fingers from both her hands.  
THE 21ST. She announces that the following examples are of buggers 
who wish to commit exclusively masculine murders.  109. He buries the muzzle of a shotgun in the boy’s ass, the we apon is 
loaded with buckshot and he has just finished fucking the lad. He pulls the 
trigger; the gun and his prick discharge simultaneously.  
110. He obliges the lad to watch his mistress being mutilated, and to eat her 
flesh, principally her buttocks, brea sts, and heart. He has the option of eating 
these meats, or of dying of hunger. As soon as he has devoured them, if ’tis  that 
he elects to do, the libertine inflicts several deep wounds upon him and leaves 
him thus to bleed to death; if he abstains from ea ting, he then starves to death.  
111. He tears off the youth’s testicles and, a short while later, serves them 
up to him in a ragout, then, in place of the stolen treasure, substitutes spheres 
of quicksilver and fills his voided scrotum with sulphur a -plenty, which cause 
such violent suffering that the patient succumbs. During his agony, the 
libertine embuggers him and increases the boy’s trouble by burning him here, there and everywhere with sulphur- impregnated slivers, and by scratching, 
picking, and furth er burning these wounds.  
112. He drives a long spike through the victim’s asshole and thus nails him 
to a slender pole, and leaves him to sigh away his last hours, or days. 
113. He embuggers, and whilst sodomizing, opens the cranium, removes 
the brain, and  fills the cavity with molten lead.  
Vigorously fustigated beforehand, Hyacinthe’s ass is made generally 
available that evening. Narcisse is presented to the assembly: off come 
his balls with a snip of the scissors. Adelaide is summoned forth, a red -
hot fir e shovel is brushed over the rear of her thighs, they burn her 
clitoris, pierce her tongue, lash her breasts with cruel instruments, cut off 
the two little buttons on her breasts, break both her arms, carve away her 
remaining fingers, tear the hair from he r cunt, tear a handful of hair 
from her head, pull out six of her teeth. Thus discomfited, she causes Messieurs to discharge every one save the Duc who, his livid prick 
straining upward, demands leave to exercise Thérèse all alone. Leave so 
to do is accord ed him; using a pocketknife, he pries out all her nails and, 
as he proceeds, burns her fingers with a candle, then he fractures one of 
her arms, and still he does not discharge; very wroth, he leaps upon 
Augustine, encunts her and tears out one of her teet h as he spills his seed 
into her womb.  
THE 22ND. 114. He breaks a young boy on the rack, then affixes him to a 
wheel upon which he is left to expire: upon the wheel he is turned in such a 
way as to expose his buttocks, and the scoundrel, his tormentor, has  his table set 
beneath the wheel, and dines there every day until the patient is no more.  
115. He flays a young boy, rubs his body with honey, and invites the flies to 
the feast.  
116. He slices off his prick and breasts, nails one of his feet to a post, on e of 
his hands to another post, and thus he is left to expire with however little dignity.  
117. The same man who had made Duclos take supper with his dogs, owns 
a lion too, and, arming a boy with a light stick, introduces the youngster into the lion’s cage . The boy’s defense only further arouses the animal; the libertine 
watches the contest and discharges when the loser is completely devoured.  
118. Clothed in a mare’s skin, his asshole smeared with mare’s fuck, a small 
boy is surrendered to an excited horse. The libertine observes their struggles 
and the boy’s death.  
Giton is subjected to tortures that evening: the Duc, Curval, Hercule, 
and Bum -Cleaver penetrate his ass ungreased. He is whipped very 
lustily, Messieurs extract four of his teeth, cut off four of his fingers (as always. each friend has a share in the despoiling of the victim), and 
Durcet crushes one of his balls between thumb and forefinger. All four 
gentlemen soundly flog Augustine. Her glorious ass is soon washed in 
blood, the Duc embuggers he r while Curval severs one of her fingers, 
then Curval marches into the breach while the Duc six times sears her 
thighs with a hot iron; Blangis snips away yet another finger the same 
instant his colleague discharges, and despite all this rough treatment, s he 
spends the night, a stormy one, in the Duc’s bed. Marie sustains a 
broken arm, her fingernails are drawn out, her fingers burned.  
That same night, Durcet and Curval, seconded by Desgranges and 
Duclos, accompany Adelaide to the cellars. Curval gives her a farewell 
embuggering, then they cause her to die in the throes of terrible 
sufferings, which you will give in full detail.  
THE 23RD. 119. He places a young boy in a machine which stretches him, 
dislocating his bones; he is meticulously and thoroughly bro ken, then removed 
from the machine, given a chance to recover his breath, exposed to the process 
again; and so it continues for several days, until the patient’s death.  
120. He has a pretty girl pollute and fatigue a young boy; he is drained very 
dry indee d, but still the girl toils over him, he is given no nourishment, and 
eventually dies in horrible convulsions.  
121. In the space of a single day, he performs four operations upon the 
young man: a gallstone removal, a trepanning, the excision of a fistula i n the 
eye, of one in the anus. He knows just enough about surgery to botch all four 
operations; then he abandons the patient, giving him no further help and 
watching him expire.  
122. After having sheared off the boy’s prick and balls, using a red -hot iron 
he hollows out a cunt in the place formerly occupied by his genitals; the iron makes the hole and cauterizes simultaneously:  he fucks the patient’s new orifice 
and strangles him with his hands upon discharging.  
123. He massages him with a currycomb; when h e has generally abraded 
his flesh in this fashion, he rubs him with alcohol, ignites it, resumes his 
combing, rubs again with alcohol, relights the torch, proceeding in this wise till 
death makes further care unnecessary.  
That same evening, Narcisse’s turn  arrives to be vexed; fire is applied 
to his thighs and little prick, then Messieurs crush his two balls.  
They turn again to Augustine upon the recommendation of the Duc, 
whose spiteful attitude toward her seems only to have worsened; they 
burn her thighs and armpits, a very hot bar of iron is rammed into her 
cunt. She faints, the Duc waxes all the more furious, he shears off one of 
her nipples, drinks her blood, breaks both her arms, and tears out her cunt hair, all her teeth, and cuts off every finger left on her hands, 
cauterizing the wounds with fire. And once again ’tis  in his bed she 
sleeps, or rather lies, that night, for if one is to believe Duclos, he fucks 
her fore and aft the whole night long, repeatedly telling her that the day 
about to dawn will  be her last.  
Louison appears, they break one of her arms, burn her tongue, her 
clitoris, tear out all her nails, and burn the tips of her bleeding fingers. Curval sodomizes her in this state and, in his rage, twists and 
manhandles one of Zelmire’s breasts  while discharging. Not content 
with those abuses, he catches hold of her again and whips her until he 
cannot lift his arm.  
THE 24TH. 124. The same man Martaine referred to on the 1st of January 
wishes to embugger the father while his two children observe,  and as he discharges, he stabs one child to death with one hand, and with his other 
strangles the second.  
125. His first passion was to flog the bellies of pregnant women; his second 
is to assemble six of them whose pregnancy has reached the end of the ei ght 
month: he ties them back to back, their bellies prominently thrust forward: he 
splits open the belly of the first, perforates the belly of the second with dagger 
thrusts, gives a hundred kicks to the third’s, a hundred blows of a club deflates the bell y of the fourth, he burns the fifth’s, applies a rasp to the sixth’s, and 
then, using a truncheon upon her belly, he finishes off whichever amongst them has survived her treatment.  
Curval interrupts the narrations with some furious scene or other, this 
passion having had a great effect upon his mind.  
126. The seducer mentioned by Duclos assembles two women. Says he to the 
first: “Deny God and religion if you wish to live,” but his valet has whispered 
to her, telling her to say nothing, for if she does, she shall surely be killed, but 
by keeping silent she shall have nothing to fear. Hence, she is mute; he blows out her brains, murmuring, “There’s one for God.” He calls the second; struck 
by the example of the first and remembering what she has been told befo re 
entering the room, that she has no choice but to renounce belief in God and 
religion if she is to save herself, she assents to all he proposes: he blows out her 
brains: “And there’s another for the Devil.” The villain plays that little game 
every week.  
127. He is a great bugger and he is fond of giving dances, but the ceiling in 
the salon is of a special order, it collapses as soon as the room is filled, and 
nearly everyone perishes. Were he to remain living in the same city for any 
length of time, he wo uld be detected, but he moves frequently; he is eventually 
found out, but only after having given his fiftieth dance.  128. Martaine’s of the 27th of January, whose taste is to promote abortions, 
establishes three pregnant women in three cruel postures, com posing an artistic 
group. Thus situated, they give birth while he looks on, then he ties each infant 
to its mother’s neck until the little creature either dies or is eaten, for the libertine keeps the women just where they are and gives them no food. The 
same personage has yet another passion: he has two women whelp in his 
presence, blindfolds them, and after having himself identified the infants by 
some mark, he puts them side by side and bids each woman go and recover each 
her own offspring; if the ladies  are not  mistaken, he permits their young to 
live, but if they are in error, he carves up the children with a saber.  
Narcisse is presented at the evening orgies. While the Bishop 
sodomizes the little fellow, Durcet relieves him of his remaining digits 
and inserts a red -hot needle into his urethral canal. They bid Giton step 
forth, he is kicked about, ’tis  a lively game of ball they play with him, 
three of the friends fracture one of his legs while the Duc embuggers him. 
Zelmire’s turn: they roast her clitor is, sear her tongue, bake her gums, 
extract four of her teeth, burn her thighs in six places before and behind, 
snip away her nipples, unfinger both her hands, and when she is thus 
prepared to afford pleasure, Curval embuggers her. But he does not 
discharg e. 
Up steps Fanchon. Their attentions cost her an eye.  
Escorted by Desgranges and Duclos, the Duc and Curval make a 
journey to the cellars with Augustine in the course of that night; her ass 
has been preserved in excellent condition, ’tis  now lashed to tat ters, then 
the two brothers alternately embugger her, but guard their seed, and 
then the Duc gives her fifty -eight wounds in the buttocks, pours boiling 
oil into each gash. He drives a hot iron into her cunt, another into her ass, and fucks her wounded cha rms, his prick sheathed in a sealskin 
condom which worsens the already lamentable state of her privities. 
That accomplished, the flesh is peeled away from the bones of her arms 
and legs, which bones are sawed in several different places, then her nerves ar e laid bare in four adjacent places, the nerve ends are tied to a 
short stick which, like a tourniquet, is twisted, thus drawing forth the aforesaid nerves, which are very delicate parts of the human anatomy and, which, when mistreated, cause the patient t o suffer much. 
Augustine’s agonies are unheard -of. 
She is given some respite and allowed to recruit her strength, then 
Messieurs resume work, but this time, as the nerves are pulled into sight, 
they are scraped with the blade of a knife. The friends comple te that 
operation and now move elsewhere; a hole is bored in her throat, her 
tongue is drawn back, down, and passed through it, ’tis  a comical effect, 
they broil her remaining breast, then, clutching a scalpel, the Duc thrusts his hand into her cunt and cuts through the partition dividing the anus from the vagina; he throws aside the scalpel, reintroduces his hand, and 
rummaging about in her entrails, forces her to shit through her cunt, 
another amusing stunt; then, availing himself of the same entrance, he  
reaches up and tears open her stomach. Next, they concentrate upon her 
visage: cut away her ears, burn her nasal passages, blind her eyes with 
molten sealing wax, girdle her cranium, hang her by the hair, attach heavy stones to her feet, and allow her to drop: the top of the skull 
remains dangling.  
She was still breathing when she fell, and the Duc encunted her in 
this sorry state; he discharged and came away only the more enraged. They split her belly, opened her, and applied fire to her entrails; scalpel  
in hand, the Président burrows in her chest and harasses her heart, puncturing it in several places. ’Twas  only then her soul fled her body; at 
the age of fifteen years and eight months thus perished one of the most 
heavenly creatures ever formed by Nature’s skillful hand. Etc. Her 
eulogy.  
THE 25TH. That morning, the Duc takes Colombe to be his wife and 
hereafter she performs all a wife’s functions.  
129. A great connoisseur of the ass and a man mightily fond thereof, he 
embuggers the mistress while the lov er looks on, then the lover while his 
mistress watches, then he nails the lover over the mistress’ body and leaves them to expire, mouth to mouth.  
Such will be the end of Céladon and Sophie, who are in love, and 
Messieurs interrupt the storyteller to oblig e Céladon himself to spread a 
little hot sealing wax on his dear Sophie’s thighs; while obeying 
instructions, he collapses: while lying unconscious, he is embuggered by 
the Bishop.  
130. He who was wont to amuse himself by throwing a girl into water and 
pulling her out, has as his second passion that of casting seven or eight whores 
into a pond and watching them thrash about, for they are poor swimmers. He 
tenders them an iron pike, but it is heated red hot; still they cling to it, but he 
thrusts them  away, and that they the more certainly perish, he has amputated 
one limb from each of them before throwing them in.  
131. His earlier caprice was to cause vomiting; his improvement thereof is, 
by using a secret means, to spread the plague throughout an entire pro vince: he 
has brought about the death of a truly incredible number of people. He also 
poisons wells and streams.  132. Fond of employing the whip, he has three pregnant women locked in 
an iron cage, and with them he imprisons their three children; a fire is  lit 
beneath the cage, its occupants caper and dance more and more in earnest as 
the floor heats; the women take the children in their arms, and finally fall and die in this manner.  
(That one belongs somewhere further above; move it to its proper 
place.)  
133. ’Twas  he who pricked with an awl; more of a man today, he seals a 
pregnant woman in a chest whose interior is studded with sharp nails; he then has the chest rolled and dragged through the garden.  
These tales of pregnant women being chastised have prov en as woeful 
to Constance’s ears as they have delighted Curval’s; she sees only too well what the future holds in store for her. As her fatal hour is drawing nigh, Messieurs are of the opinion her vexations may be inaugurated: her 
thighs are burned in six places, molten wax is allowed to trickle upon her 
navel, and her breasts are teased with pins.  
Giton appears, a burning needle is run through his little member, his 
little balls are stabbed, four of his teeth are extracted.  
Then comes Zelmire, whose death is not far off; deep into her cunt 
runs a red -hot poker, six wounds are inflicted upon her breasts, a dozen 
upon her thighs, needles are driven far into her navel, each friend 
bestows twenty strong blows upon her face. They forcibly remove four of her teet h, her eye is pricked, she is whipped, she is embuggered. While 
in the act of sodomizing her, Curval, her husband, gives her intelligence 
of her death, scheduled for the morrow; she declares she is not sorry to 
learn the tidings, for ’twill  put a period to her sorrows.  Rosette steps forward; four teeth are jerked from her mouth, each of 
her shoulders is branded, her thighs and calves are gashed and hacked; 
she is then embuggered while several hands worry her breasts.  
And now Thérèse advances; out comes an e ye, a hundred blows of the 
bull’s pizzle rain down upon her scrawny back.  
THE 26TH. 134. A bugger takes his stand at the foot of a tower; the earth 
about him is studded with sharpened steel rods pointing upward; his associates 
pitch several children of bot h sexes from the top of the tower. He has previously 
embuggered them, and now enjoys seeing them impaled a second time. ’Tis , he 
considers, very thrilling to be splashed by their blood.  
135. The same personage she cited on the 11th and 13th of February, wh ose 
tastes ran to instigating combustions, also delights in binding six pregnant women to bundles of inflammable materials; these he sets afire, and if his victims undertake to save themselves, he awaits them, pitchfork in hand, 
skewers them and hurls them  back into the blaze. However, when half -
roasted, the floor gives way and they spill into a large vat of boiling oil, 
wherein they finally perish.  
136. He is the nobleman Duclos spoke of, who has no fondness for the poor 
and who bought Lucile, her mother, and her sister, and whom Desgranges has also cited  (verify this); another of his passions is to assemble a family of 
beggars over a mine and to watch those luckless creatures blown to bits.  
137. A notorious sodomist, in order to combine that crime with those of 
incest, murder, rape, sacrilege, and adultery, first inserts a Host in his ass, then 
has himself embuggered by his own son, rapes his married daughter, and kills 
his niece.  
138. Greatly partisan to asses, he strangles a mother while embuggering 
her; when she is dead, he turns her over and cunt -fucks her corpse. While discharging, he kills her daughter with a  knife, slashing her breasts, then he 
buggers the girl even though she is dead; then apparently convinced there is 
still some life in his victims,  and fancying they are yet capable of suffering, he 
hurls the cadavers into a fire and discharges as he watches them burn. Duclos 
spoke of this wealthy individual on the 29th of November: ’twas  he who liked 
to see the girl lying on the pallet covered with black satin; he is also the same 
man who figured in Martaine’s first tale of the 11th of January.  
The evening’s program begins with Narcisse. One of his hands is 
lopped off.  
Giton loses a hand too.  
The interior of Michette’s cunt is burned, the same treatm ent is given 
Rosette’s, and then both girls are burned upon the body and breasts. But Curval, who has lost control of himself, violates the society’s charter and cleaves an entire breast from Rosette’s chest, all the while embuggering 
Michette.  
Thérèse mak es a further appearance; she receives two hundred blows 
of the bull’s pizzle and loses her other eye.  
Curval goes in search of the Duc that night when all is still and, 
accompanied by Desgranges and Duclos, those two champions take 
Zelmire down to the cell ars where the most refined tortures are put to 
use upon her: they are all much more painful, more severe than the others employed upon Augustine, and the two men are still hard at work by the time breakfast arrives the following morning. That enchanting 
girl dies at the age of fifteen years and two months. ’Twas  she who could 
boast the most beautiful ass in the harem of little girls. And thus 
deprived of a wife, the Président weds Hébé the next day.  THE 27TH. The seventeenth and last week’s festival is post poned until 
the morrow, in order that the holiday may coincide with the end of the 
narrations; Desgranges recounts the following passions:  
139. A man Martaine described on the 12th of January, the one who set off 
fireworks in the woman’s ass, has, for his second,  this other passion: he ties two 
pregnant women together so that they form a ball and fires them from a large 
mortar.  
140. He was a scratcher and scab picker; he now places two pregnant 
women in a room and obliges them to fight with knives (he obser ves them 
from a safe position); they are naked, he threatens them with a gun he keeps 
trained upon them, and promises to shoot them dead if they begin to dally and 
falter. If they kill each other, why, that is precisely what he wishes, if not, 
sword in han d, he rushes into the arena and, after killing one, he disembowels 
the other and burns her entrails with aqua fortis, or with pieces of red -hot 
metal.  
141. A man who once liked to flog pregnant women’s bellies has reformed: 
he presently binds a pregnant gi rl to a wheel and beneath it, fixed in a chair 
and unable to move, sits the girl’s mother, her head flung back, her mouth open 
and ready to receive all the ordures and rubbish which flow out of the corpse, 
and the infant, too, if the girl gives birth to it.  
142. Martaine’s of the 16th of January, whose joy was to prick asses, 
attaches a girl to a machine studded with sharp iron points; he fucks her as she 
lies upon that bed, with every blow of his loins he drives her upon the nails, 
then he turns her over a nd fucks her ass- wise, that she may also be punctured 
on the other side. When he has finished that phase of the operation, he lays a 
second plank above her, and it is likewise provided with nails; the planks are 
brought together by means of bolts, thus die s the patient, crushed and stabbed in a multitude of places. The pressing is carried out gradually, she is given 
ample opportunity to savor her pain.  
143. A fustigator stretches a pregnant woman out upon a table; he nails her 
thereto, first driving a fiery  nail into each eye, one into her mouth, another 
into either breast, then he burns her clitoris and nipples with a taper, and 
slowly saws her knees halfway through, breaks her legs, and ends by 
hammering a red -hot spike, of enormous size, into her navel: i t undoes both 
mother and child. He likes to have her ready to give birth.  
Messieurs whip Julie and Duclos that evening, but from amusement, 
since they are both amongst the inhabitants of Silling who shall transfer 
their residence to Paris: nevertheless, Ju lie’s thighs are burned in two 
places, and she is depilated.  
Sentenced to die the next day but unaware of her impending fate, 
Constance appears; her nipples are scorched, molten wax is allowed to 
trickle down over her belly, she yields four teeth, Messieur s prick the 
white of her eyes with needles.  
Narcisse, also due to be immolated on the 28th of February, enters 
upon the stage; he loses an eye and four teeth.  
Giton, Michette, and Rosette, destined to accompany Constance to 
the grave, each surrenders an ey e and four teeth, Rosette her two nipples 
to the knife and six chunks of flesh, some of them carved from her arms, 
some from her thighs; all her fingers are neatly severed, and hot irons are introduced into her cunt and bum. Both Curval and the Duc dischar ge 
twice.  
Up steps Louison; she weathers a storm of one hundred blows of the 
bull’s pizzle; Messieurs pluck out one of her eyes and, most cynically, bid 
her swallow it. Down it goes.  THE 28TH. 144. A bugger: has two girls brought to him, they are fast 
friends, he ties them mouth to mouth, and by their side sits an excellent meal; 
but they cannot get to it, and he watches them bite and eat each other when 
hunger begins to exert its influence upon them.  
145. A man who as a boy was wont to flog pregnant women, now shuts six 
of this sort into a round cage formed by large iron hoops: they are all facing one 
another. Little by little, the hoops contract, little by little they are brought together, slowly they are flattened, gradually all six are crushed, their fru it 
crushed too. But prior to this he has cut a buttock and a breast from each and fashioned six collars therefrom: each woman wears one as you might a fur 
tippet.  
146. Another pregnant -woman beater binds two of these objects each to the 
end of a long tilti ng pole; a clever machine, into which the other ends of the 
poles are inserted, bumps and bangs the women against each other. These 
repeated collisions are their  mutual undoing, and he discharges. He makes 
every effort to procure himself a mother and daughter, or two sisters.  
147. That Comte of whom Duclos spoke at length, and to whom 
Desgranges alluded once before on the 26th, he who purchased Lucile, Lucile’s 
mother, and Lucile’s little sister, of whom Martaine also spoke in her fourth 
tale on the 1st of January, this Comte, I say, has another passion still: ’tis  to 
suspend three women over three holes. The first woman hangs by her tongue, beneath her is a very deep well; the second hangs from her breasts, underneath 
her lies a charcoal brazier; the scalp of the third has been loosened, she hangs by 
her hair over a pit studded with pointed iron rods. When the weight of their 
bodies causes these women to fall free—when the scalp is torn from the head of 
the third, when the breasts of the second tear loose from her torso, when the 
tongue of the first is torn from her mouth —they only escape one difficulty in order to encounter a new one. Whenever possible, he suspends three pregnant 
women, or three women from the same family; such was his unkind use of 
Lucile, her sister, and her mother.  
148. The last passion.  
(But why the last? Where are the other two? They were all there in 
the original outline.)  
Desgranges recounts the last passion:  
The nobleman who indulges in this final passion we shall designate as the 
infernal caprice or, more simply, as the hell passion, has been cited four times: 
by Duclos in the last story she told on the 29th of November; by Champville, 
when referring to a personage who depucelates nine -year-olds only; by 
Martaine, as he who depucelates three -year-olds in the bum; by Desgranges 
who mentioned him in an earlier connection  (establish that connection 
more precisely). He is a man of some forty years, enormous in stature and 
furnished with the member of a stallion: his prick is very near to n ine inches in 
circumference and a foot in overall length; he is exceedingly wealthy, a very 
powerful lord, very harsh, very cruel, his heart is of stone. He has a house on 
the outskirts of Paris which he uses for no purpose other than the gratification 
of this passion.  
The surroundings wherein he savors his delight is a spacious room, simply 
decked, but padded everywhere, the floor covered with mattresses; upon 
entering the room one sees a single long casement window, the room has no other opening save for the door; that window looks down upon an 
underground cellar, twenty feet below the salon where he busies himself, and 
looking out, one sees the mattresses which break the fall of the girls he flings 
down into the cellar, a description whereof we shall give shortly. He requires 
fifteen girls for this party; their ages must be between fifteen and seventeen, neither more, nor less; he employs six procuresses in Paris, as well as twelve in the provinces, and they are to spare no efforts, no expense to find him 
everything of the most charming that may possibly be found of that age, and as 
it is collected, the material is sent to a country convent over which he has 
absolute control, and there, in that nursery, the girls ripen, and from it he selects the fifteen ob jects for his debauch, which is regularly executed every 
fortnight.  
That evening before the ceremony begins, he personally examines the said 
material, the least defect in which warrants its rejection; he insists that his 
creatures be perfect models of beau ty. Escorted by a procuress, they arrive at the 
house and are lodged in a room adjacent to the pleasure -salon. They are first 
exhibited to him in this adjoining chamber, all fifteen are naked. He touches, 
feels, fondles, experiments with them, he scrutinizes them, sucks their mouths, 
and one after the other has them all shit into his mouth. But he does not swallow. 
This initial operation performed with dreadful seriousness, he brands each 
upon the shoulder, imprinting a number in her flesh; it is to indicat e the order 
in which he will receive them. That done, he goes alone into the salon, where 
he remains for a brief space: no one knows what he does in this moment of 
solitude. Then he knocks. Girl Number 1 is cast into his lair. And she is 
properly cast into  it: the procuress flings her toward him, he catches her in his 
arms, she is naked. He shuts the door, takes up switches and begins to flail her 
ass; after that he sodomizes her with his gigantic prick. Never does he need any help. He does not discharge. H is prick retires, still rock -hard; he seizes the 
switches again and returns to lashing the girl’s back, the front and back of her thighs, then he lays her down again and deflowers her cunt; next, he goes back 
to beating  her, now upon the breasts, both of w hich he seizes and grinds and 
kneads with all his strength, and he is a strong man. And now he picks up an awl and six times stabs her body, driving his point once into each bruised 
breast.  
After all that has been done, he opens the casement window, places  the girl 
in the middle of the room, standing erect, at attention, facing the window; he stands behind her and, when all is ready, gives her a kick in the ass of such 
startling violence that she flies across the room, crashes against the windowsill, 
topples over it, and vanishes into the cellar. But before launching her, he slips a ribbon around her neck, thereby to signify which torture, according to his best 
belief, will be most suitable for that particular patient, which torture will 
prove most voluptuou s to inflict upon her, and his acuity and judgment in 
these matters, his tact and discrimination are truly wonderful.  
And thus the girls pass one by one through his hands, the identical ceremony 
awaits them all, and thus he makes away with thirty maidenheads in a given day, and performs those heroic feats unscathed: not a drop of fuck does he lose. 
The subterranean apartment into which the girls tumble is furnished with 
fifteen different assortments of frightful torture machines, and an executioner, wearing  the mask and emblems of a demon, wearing also the colors of his 
specialty, presides over each apparatus. The ribbon placed about the girl’s neck 
corresponds in color with the torture to which she has been condemned, and 
directly she falls into the pit, th e appropriate executioner steps forward, having 
recognized his victim, and drags her to the machine of which he has charge, 
but the tortures do not begin until the fifteenth has entered the gallery and been claimed by her demon. As soon as the entire compl ement has descended, 
our man, by now in a furious state after having depucelated thirty orifices without discharging, our man, I say, makes his entrance into the infernal 
repair; he is practically naked, his prick is glued against his belly. Everything 
is ready, all the tortures are in motion, and they proceed simultaneously, 
amidst much noise.  The first torture engine is a wheel upon which the girl is strapped and 
which, rotating uninterruptedly, bears against an outer circle studded with 
razors which everywhere scratch and tear  and slice the unfortunate victim, but 
as the blades do not bite deep, only superficially, she turns for at least two hours 
before dying.  
The second: the girl lies two inches above a red -hot iron plate which slowly 
melts her.  
Third: she is attached by the waist to a piece of burning iron, and all her 
limbs are twisted and frightfully dislocated.  
Fourth: the four limbs attached each to a spring which slowly moves away, 
gradually stretching her arms and legs until they are detached and the trunk 
falls into a brazier.  
Fifth: a red -hot cast -iron bell is placed over her head, but the bonnet is 
several sizes too large, the iron does not touch her, but her brain slowly melts, 
her head is slowly grilled.  
Sixth: she is chained inside an iron tu b of boiling oil.  
Seventh: she is held standing before a machine which, six times a minute, 
shoots a small dart into her body, and each time into a different place; the 
machine does not stop until she is entirely feathered.  
Eighth: her feet anchored in a f urnace, a mass of lead very gradually 
descends upon her head, thrusting her further into the oven.  
Ninth: her executioner continually pricks her with a red -hot iron goad; she 
is bound before him, he thus meticulously works over every inch of her body.  
Tent h: she is chained to a pillar underneath a large glass dome, twenty 
famished reptiles devour her alive.  
Eleventh: a cannon ball attached to each foot, she is suspended by one hand, 
and if she falls, ’tis  into a furnace.  Twelfth: a hook is driven through he r mouth; thus she hangs, a deluge of 
burning pitch incessantly pouring over her body.  
Thirteenth: the nerves are pulled from her flesh and tied to cords which 
draw them further, and meanwhile burning nails are driven into her body.  
Fourteenth: alternately torn with tongs and whipped upon her cunt and ass 
with martinets whose steel tips are heated red hot, and from time to time 
scratched with burning iron rakes.  
Fifteenth: she is poisoned by a drug which burns and rends her entrails, 
which hurls her into fri ghtful convulsions, causes her to utter hideous screams, 
and insures her death; but it is slow, and she is the last to succumb. This is one of the most terrible of the ordeals.  
The villain walks about the torture chamber as soon as he arrives there, 
spends  fifteen minutes contemplating each operation while swearing like one of 
the damned and overwhelming the patient with unmentionable invectives. 
When toward the end he can bear no more of it and his fuck, captive for so 
long, is ready to escape him, he fall s into a comfortable armchair whence he can 
observe the entire spectacle, two of the demons approach him, display their 
asses and frig him, and he squirts his seed while pronouncing shouts so 
stentorian that they rise above and totally blot out the din his  fifteen patients 
are producing. And now he gets to his feet and leaves the gallery, the  coup de 
grâce is given the girls who are not yet dead, their bodies are buried, and 
there’s an end to it until the next fortnight comes round.  
Wherewith Desgranges terminates her contribution; she is 
congratulated, toasted, acclaimed, etc …. 
Upon the morning of that day there had been the most ominous 
preparations for the great holiday Messieurs were meditating. Curval, 
detesting Constance as he does, had been cunt -fucking her at a very 
early hour and while fucking her had imparted grave news to her. Coffee was served by the five victims, to wit: Constance, Narcisse, Giton, 
Michette, and Rosette. Horrid things were perpetrated in the salon; 
during the recitations the read er has just perused, the quatrains 
Messieurs had been able to arrange had been composed of naked 
children. And as soon as Desgranges had brought her narrations to a 
term, Fanny had been marched to the fore: her remaining fingers and 
toes had been hacked of f, and Curval had embuggered her without 
pomade, so had the Duc, so had the four first -rank fuckers.  
Sophie was led into the center of the stage; Céladon, her lover, had 
been obliged to burn the interior of her cunt, all her fingers had been severed, her f our limbs bled, her right ear had been torn away, her left 
eye gouged out. Céladon had been constrained to lend his assistance in all these operations, and his least frown or lowest murmur was rewarded by a flogging with an iron- tipped martinet. Supper had  come next, the 
meal had been voluptuous, Messieurs drank naught but sparkling champagne and liqueurs.  
The torturing was arranged for the orgy hour; as the friends sat at 
dessert, word was brought to them that everything was in readiness, they 
descended an d found the cellars agreeably festooned and very properly 
furnished. Constance lay upon a kind of mausoleum, the four children 
decorated its corners. As their asses were still in excellent condition, 
Messieurs were able to take considerable pleasure in mol esting them; 
then at last the heavier work was begun: while embuggering Giton, 
Curval himself opened Constance’s belly and tore out the fruit, already 
well-ripened and clearly of the masculine sex; then the society continued, 
inflicting tortures upon those  five victims. Their sufferings were long, 
cruel, and various.  Upon THE 1ST DAY OF MARCH , remarking that the snows have not 
yet melted, Messieurs decide to dispatch the rest of the subjects one by 
one. Messieurs devise new arrangements whereby to keep thei r 
bedchambers staffed, and agree to give a green ribbon to everyone whom 
they propose to take back with them to France; the green favor is 
bestowed, however, upon condition the recipient is willing to lend a 
hand with the destruction of the other victims. Nothing is said to the six women in the kitchen; Messieurs decide to do away with the three 
scullery maids, who are well worth toying over, but to spare the cooks, 
because of their considerable talents. And so a list is drawn up; ’tis  found 
that, to date, the following creatures had already been sacrificed:  
Wives: Aline, Adelaide, and Constance  . . . . . . . . . . . 3  
Sultanas: Augustine, Michette, Rosette,  
and Zelmire  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4  
Bardashes: Giton and Narcis se . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2  
Fuckers: one subaltern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1  
Total . . . . . 10 
The new ménages are arranged:  
The Duc takes unto himself, or under his protection:  
Hercule, Duclos, one cook  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4  
Curval takes: Bum -Cleaver, Champville, one cook . . . . 4  
Durcet takes: Invictus, Martaine, one cook . . . . . . . . . . 4  
And the Bishop: Antinoüs, Desgranges, Julie . . . . . . . .  4 
Total  . . . . .  16 
Messieurs decide that, up on a given signal, and with the aid of the 
four fuckers and the four storytellers, but not the cooks whom they do not wish to employ for these purposes, they will seize all the others, 
making use of the most treacherous possible means and when their 
victim s least expect it; they will lay hands upon all the others, I say, save 
for the three scullions, who will not be seized until later on; it is further 
decided that the upstairs chambers will be converted into four prisons, 
that the three subaltern fuckers, manacled, will be lodged in the 
strongest of these prisons; Fanny, Colombe, Sophie, and Hébé in the second; Céladon, Zélamir, Cupidon, Zéphyr, Adonis, and Hyacinthe in 
the third; and the four elders in the fourth; that one subject will be 
dispatched every day; and that when the hour arrives to arrest the three 
scullions, they will be locked into whichever of the prisons happens to be 
empty.  
These agreements once reached, Messieurs appoint each storyteller 
the warden of one prison. And whenever they please, Messieurs will 
amuse themselves with these victims, either in their prison or in one of 
the larger rooms, or in their Lordships’ bedchambers, depending upon Messieurs’ individual preference. And so, as we have just indicated, one 
subject is dispatched daily, in the following order:  
On the 1st of March: Fanchon.  
On the 2nd: Louison.  
On the 3rd: Thérèse.  
On the 4th: Marie.  
On the 5th: Fanny.  
On the 6th and the 7th: Sophie and Céladon together, for they are 
lovers, and they perish nailed one to the other, as w e have hitherto 
explained.  
On the 8th: one subaltern fucker.  
On the 9th: Hébé.  On the 10th: another subaltern fucker.  
On the 11th: Colombe.  
On the 12th: the last of the subaltern fuckers.  
On the 13th: Zélamir.  
On the 14th: Cupidon.  
On the 15th: Zéphyr.  
On the 16th: Adonis.  
On the 17th: Hyacinthe.  
On the morning of the 18th, Messieurs and their cohorts seize the 
three scullions, lock them in the prison formerly occupied by the elders, 
and dispatch one upon that day,  
A second upon the 19th.  
And the last upon the 20th.  
Total  . . . . . . . .  20 
The following recapitulation lists the inhabitants of the Château of 
Silling during that memorable winter:  
Masters . . . . . . . . . . 4 
Elders . . . . . . . . . . . 4  
Kitchen staff  . . . . .  6 
Storytellers . . . . . . .  4 
Fuckers . . . . . . . . . .  8 
Little boys . . . . . . . .  8 
Wives  . . . . . . . . . . .  4 
Little girls . . . . . . . .  8 
Total . . . . . . .  46 
Whereof thirty were immolated and sixteen returned to Paris.  FINAL ASSESSMENT 
Massacred prior to the 1st of M arch,  
in the course of the orgies . . . . . . . . . . .  10 
Massacred after the 1st of March . . . . . . . .  20 
Survived and came back. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16 
Total . . . . . . .  46 
With what regards the tortures and deaths of the last twenty subje cts, 
and life such as it was in the household until the day of departure, you 
will give details at your leisure and where you see fit, you will say, first of 
all, that thirteen of the sixteen survivors (three of whom were cooks) 
took all their meals togeth er; sprinkle in whatever tortures you like.    
NOTES  
Under no circumstances deviate from this plan, everything has been 
worked out, the entirety several times re- examined with the greatest care 
and thoroughness.  
Detail the departure. And throughout the who le, introduce a quantity 
of moral dissertation and diatribe, above all at the suppers.  
When you produce the final version, keep a notebook; in it you will 
place the names of all the principal characters and the names of all those 
who play important roles, such as they who have several passions and who will appear several times in the romance, as, for example, the hell 
libertine; leave a wide margin beside their names and, as you recopy, fill 
it with everything you come across that has any bearing upon them;  this 
note is very essential, it is the sole way to keep your work clear of 
obscurities and to avoid repetitions.  
Edulcorate Part the First, it is much too strong; things develop too 
rapidly and too far in it, it cannot possibly be too soft, mild, feeble, subdued. Above all, never have the four friends do anything until it has 
first been recounted. You have not been sufficiently scrupulous in that 
connection.  
In Part the First, say that the man who mouth -fucks the little girl 
prostituted by her father is th e same man, of whom she has already 
spoken, who fucks with a dirty prick.  
Do not forget to place somewhere in December the scene of the little 
girls serving supper, squirting liqueurs from their asses into Messieurs’ 
glasses; you announced such a scene but  failed to include it in the plan.   
SUPPLEMENTARY  TORTURES  
—By means of a hollow tube, a mouse is introduced into her cunt, the 
tube is withdrawn, the cunt sewn up, and the animal, unable to get out, 
devours her entrails.  
—She is made to swallow a snake wh ich in similar wise feeds upon 
her entrails.    
ADDENDA  
In general, describe Curval and the Duc as two hot -blooded and 
imperious scoundrels, ’tis  thus you conceived of them in the plan and in 
Part the First, and figure the Bishop as a cool, reasoning and t ough -
minded villain. As for Durcet, he must be mischievous, a teaser, false, 
traitorous, perfidious. In accordance with which, have them do 
everything that conforms with such characters.  
Carefully recapitulate all the names and the qualities of all the 
personages your storytellers mention; this to avoid repetition.  
Upon one page in your notebook of characters draw the plan of the 
château, room by room, and in the blank space next to this page, itemize 
all the things done in each room.  
This entire great roll  was begun the 22nd of October, 1785, and finished 
in thirty -seven days.    
 
Part Four  
Theater    
Oxtiern, or The Misfortunes of Libertinage 
(1800) 
Sade was particularly attached to the theater, and there is good reason to 
believe that the author of Justine and The 120 Days would have given up a 
great deal in exchange for success as a dramatist. Among his earliest writings is the one -act play in prose  Le Philosophe soi -disant, which is contained in his 
manuscript of early works,  Œuvres diverses. It was probably this play which 
Sade had performed in 1772, on the private stage he had installed in his La Coste château.  
Sixteen years later, in his list of works -to-date drawn up in the Bastille —
the Catalogue raisonné of 1788—Sade plac ed the two manuscript volumes of 
his theatrical works, comprising some thirty -five acts of various plays, a comic 
opera, and a ballet, at the head of his proud list. Following his release from the 
Monarchy’s dungeons, on Good Friday of 1790, Sade concentra ted much of his 
energy upon trying to peddle his plays and get them performed. On the 3rd of 
August, 1790, the Théâtre -Italien accepted his one -act verse play,  Le 
Suborneur, which went into rehearsal the following January and had its 
première on the 5th of March, 1792. The  Journal des théâtres of the 10th of 
March relates what transpired at this first performance:  
On Monday, the 5th of March, this theater [Le Théâtre -Italien] 
attempted to present a one -act comedy in verse,  Le Suborneur. 
During the first sce ne, murmurs arose …. During the second scene, the noise increased; during the third, it reached its highest pitch; 
during the fourth, the actors left the stage. What was the reason for 
all this? We have no idea; we were unable even to hear what the 
commotio n was all about. During the intermission, we saw patriots 
donning the red bonnet with the tip pointing forward, like the 
Phrygian  corno. One of those who was thus coifed said in a loud 
voice that henceforth this red bonnet would be the signal, in public 
places, round which patriots should rally, and especially in the 
theaters, where the aristocracy would be ceaselessly combated by the friends of liberty ….”
1 
Thus ended the first p erformance of a Sade play. On the 17th of August, 
1790, just two weeks after  Le Suborneur had been accepted by Le Théâtre-
Italien, Sade gave a reading of his free -verse play,  Le Boudoir ou le Mari 
crédule at the Comédie -Française. Although it was ultimatel y rejected by one 
vote, the committee which had heard it agreed to a second reading, providing the author made certain changes. A month later, Sade’s five -act comedy in free 
verse,  Le Misanthrope par amour ou Sophie et Desfrancs was 
“unanimously accepted” by the Comédie- Française, though it was never 
performed. Within the next few months several more of Sade’s plays were “accepted” by various theaters,
2 but only one more was ever publicly presented: 
1 Cited in Lely,  op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 394 –395.  
2 In letters to Gaufridy, Sade relates that  Le Jaloux corrigé ou l’ École des Coquettes—
which is apparently another title for the play earlier rejected by the Comédie-
Française,  Le Boudoir ou le Mari crédule —was accepted by Le Théâtre- Italien; that Le 
Criminel par vertu  had been taken by Le Théâtre du Palais- Royal; and that 
his Atélis was accepted by Le Théâtre de la rue de Bondy. As Sade was to learn, 
however, there could be many a slip between the acceptance and the performance.                                           that is the play we include in the following pages,  Le Com te Oxtiern ou les 
Effets du libertinage, the première of which took place on the 22nd of 
October, 1791, at Le Théâtre Molière on  the rue Saint- Martin. Of this, Sade 
wrote elatedly to his steward Gaufridy a few days later:  
I have at last appeared in public, my dear lawyer. Last Saturday, the 
22nd, a play of mine was presented, the success of which, thanks to 
certain cliques, hirelings, and the women I insulted, was somewhat mixed. It will be staged again on the 29th, with some changes. Pray 
for me; we shall see. Adieu.
3  
The second performance, however, was postponed until the 4th of 
November, and at the curtain the audience called for the author, who appeared to take a bow. Two days later  Le Moniteur reviewed the play, and after 
giving a résumé of its plot, judged it thus:  
The play is interesting in itself and for its vigor; but the character 
of Oxtiern is a revolting atrocity. He is a worse villain, a creature 
more despicable , than Lovelace, with none of his more endearing 
qualities.  
A slight incident threat ened to disturb the second performance. At 
the start of the second act, a member of the audience, either discontent 
or malicious, but in any case wholly lacking in tact, shouted “Lower 
the curtain!” …The stage hand made the mistake of following this 
isolate d command and lowered the curtain more than halfway. 
Whereupon many other members of the audience, after having obliged him to raise it again, cried: “Throw him out!”, referring to 
3 Pierre Bourdin:  Correspondance inédite du marquis de Sade, de ses proches et de ses 
familiers.  Paris, Librairie de France, 1929, p. 298.                                           the person who had caused the original disturbance. Whence resulted 
some de gree of dissension among the audience. A tiny minority hissed 
and whistled, for which the author was more than compensated by the hearty applause of the majority. They called for him after the performance: it was Monsieur de Sade.
4 
Sade was learning that the Revolution, which had delivered him from the 
dungeons of a Monarchy he had every reason to detest, was far from ready to receive him, a  ci-devant, unreservedly. In a letter t o Gaufridy shortly after the 
second performance of  Oxtiern, Sade noted:  
The frightful disturbance which it  [Oxtiern] occasioned is the reason 
the play is not being repeated under the same title, and the reason 
why I have postponed further performances. The  members of the 
audience were at each other’s throats. The guards, and the  
commissaire, were obliged to remain in a state of constant readiness 
each time it was played. I preferred to suspend it. We shall put it on 
again this winter .
5  
Actually, it was not until eight years later that  Oxtiern was performed 
again, under a slightly different title ,6 on the stage of the  Société dramatique 
at Versailles, with Sade himself playing the role of Fabrice. The same year —
Year VIII of the Republic —Sade had the play pri nted by the Versailles 
bookseller Blaisot.  
4 Guillaume Apollinaire:  L’Œuvre du Marquis de Sade. Pages choisies.  Paris, 
Bibliothèque des Curieux, 1912, pp. 41 –42. 
5 Lely,  op. cit., Vol. II, p. 389.  
6 Which was:  Oxtiern ou les Malheurs du libertinage.                                           What of Sade the playwright? It is an understatement to maintain that, 
were his seventeen plays7 all that history had bequeathed us of his writings, 
Sade would hardly have a claim to immortality. The force, and in deed the 
essential worth, of Sade’s works varies directly in proportion to their 
clandestine nature. The more open and public they are, the more conventional 
they become. The dramatic works, being most public, suffer most from 
conventionality and from what  appears to be Sade’s inherent timidity when 
faced with the dramatic form. What makes Sade of interest is his absolute 
refusal to compromise, his determination to carry his convictions to their 
ultimate conclusions. In the theater this was virtually impossible. While he 
could still treat the same themes that abound in his fiction,  and portray virtue 
overwhelmed by vice, both character and dialogue had greatly to be diluted 
and tempered. That Sade was fully capable of writing brilliant, biting, and often wit ty dialogue is unquestionable —one need only turn to his  Dialogue 
between a Priest and a Dying Man, for example, or to  Philosophy in the 
Bedroom. Or, more simply, one need but compare the dialogues and 
characterization in the novella  Ernestine, from which  Oxtiern was drawn.  
Ernestine was written while Sade was a prisoner in the Bastille and, as 
noted, was first published in 1800 as one of the eleven stories contained in  Les 
Crimes de l’Amour. Comparing the story and the play, Maurice Heine 
observed:  
The deno uement of the story is at once more somber and richer in 
meaning than the play. Ernestine’s lover is not only imprisoned but 
sentenced to death and, though innocent, is executed on a scaffold 
erected before Oxtiern’s windows, at the very moment when he is 
7 Or eig hteen, if one counts the early Le Philosophe soi- disant,  which Sade did not 
include in his  Catalogue raisonné.                                           violating Ernestine. Later there ensues a duel between Ernestine and 
her father, both of whom believe they are fighting Oxtiern. In this 
duel, Ernestine is mortally wounded. Her father at length obtains 
justice; Oxtiern is granted a reprieve, upon conditio n that he be 
forever banished to the mines, there to perform hard labor .8  
Both these situations are typically Sadean. In the first —a “pleasure” 
recounted in  The 120 Days —the hero -villain contrives to coincide the 
moment of his own pleasure with that of hi s rival’s execution. In the second, he 
arranges to have two of virtue’s pawns mistakenly engage each other in mortal combat, the outcome of which cannot help but be tragic for the combatants, and therefore a source of pleasure to him.  
Though Lely does not rank Ernestine with Eugénie de Franval and  
Florville and Courval —which he considers the two masterpieces of  Les 
Crimes de l’Amour —in some respects it is the superior work. Each of the 
three principal characters —and even the two villains, Oxtiern and 
Madame  Scholtz —are finely -drawn personages, not of pure black or white 
but of varying shades of gray. Colonel Sanders, a well -meaning man who 
has the best interests of his daughter at heart, is none the less weak and 
vacillating, susceptible to the blandishments  of a scoundrel such as Oxtiern. 
Ernestine herself, though essentially a good and virtuous girl, is far from as 
steadfast as Justine, and allows her head to be turned by the dazzle of 
wealth and the temptation of high estate. And in the worthy Herman, Erne stine’s betrothed, Sade has painted a splendid portrait of a man who, 
by the oppressive nature of his goodness and his stifling lack of imagination, helps drive Ernestine into Oxtiern’s careful trap. In this tale, Sade has 
given the characters a psychologi cal basis for their acts. Oxtiern, as Sadean 
8 Cited in Lely,  op. cit., Vol. II, p. 390.                                           man, is still very much the manipulator of their fate, but his three 
victims—Ernestine, Colonel Sanders, and Herman—are more than mere 
pawns, or the incarnations of a principle: they are, to a far greater degree  
than most of Sade’s characters, responsible for their own fate.  
  Oxtiern  
OR 
THE MISFORTUNES OF LIBERTINAGE  
PROSE DRAMA IN THREE ACTS  
by D. -A.-F. S. 
Staged at the Théâtre de Molière,  in Paris, in 1791; and at Versailles, on 
the stage of the Société Drama tique,  on 22 Frimaire,  Year 8 of the 
Republic.  
 
Woe unto scoundrels whom remorse does not check!  
Oxtiern,  Act Three, Scene III  
 
VERSAILLES  
Published by Blaizot, Bookseller, rue Satory 
YEAR EIGHT  
   
Act One  
 
The setting for the first two acts is the sitti ng room of an inn, which opens 
into several private rooms; on one side of the stage is a writing table, with an 
armchair near the table.  
 
SCENE I  
FABRICE, CASIMIR.  
 
FABRICE . 
Monsieur Casimir, do you think these chambers will be suitable for 
the young lady your master is bringing here with him today?  
CASIMIR . 
I do indeed, Monsieur Fabrice. Is there a room close by for Amélie, 
her maid, and another bedroom for Mademoiselle Ernestine?  
FABRICE . 
Yes, there are two bedrooms adjoining this room; one key locks all 
three. They will be quite comfortable here, I can assure you …. ’Tis a 
quiet district …the rooms face the garden: they will not hear the least 
sound of the other travelers.  CASIMIR . 
Excellent! (Taking Fabrice aside, and with an air of mystery.) Monsieur 
Fabrice? 
FABRICE . 
Yes, what is it? 
CASIMIR . 
A most extraordinary man, my master, you must confess. You have 
known him since he was a young man.  
FABRICE . 
I’ve known Oxtiern for a long time; and ’tis  for that reason I would 
venture to say there’s no man in all t he provinces of Sweden more 
dangerous than he.  
CASIMIR . 
Yes; but he pays well.  
FABRICE . 
And therefore is all the more to be feared: there is nothing so 
pernicious as gold in the hands of wicked men…. Who can resist him 
who possesses the surest means of cor ruption? …My friend, if I had my 
way I would see to it that the world’s wealth was controlled by honest 
and decent people …. But, pray tell me, what is this latest adventure all 
about?  CASIMIR . 
A charming girl! …Ah! Monsieur Fabrice, more’s the pity. Great God! 
you mean you allowed it! Is’t possible for such a creature to be the pawn 
of deceit and debauchery!  
FABRICE , much surprised.  
What do you mean? Has the crime already been committed?  
CASIMIR . 
It has, Monsieur Fabrice, it has …. And yet she’s the daughter o f 
Colonel Falkenheim, the grandnephew  of Charles XII’s favorite. He has 
abducted her …and dishonored her. I tell you, Monsieur Fabrice, the 
poor girl is lost!  
FABRICE , as above. 
He hasn’t married her? ’Tis  a virtuous girl he is bringing here, a girl he 
has seduced, deceived, and ravished? …Casimir, fly to your master in all 
haste; tell him the inn is full… say I cannot receive him. I have already 
had more than my share of the liberties he thinks he can take when he’s 
beneath my roof—since he does me the honor of considering me his 
protégé. I greatly prefer to forgo a nobleman’s protection when the sole 
result, as it usually turns out, is my complicity in his licentious ways. (He 
exits.)  
CASIMIR , running after him to stop him.  
One moment, my friend, one moment. You would lose everything, 
and no wrong would be righted. Open your house to him, offer him your 
hospitality, and if the occasion presents itself, try secretly to render the 
lady some service. (What follows must be stressed.)  Stockholm is but a league away…’tis  not late …. They will be retiring early…they are in 
need of rest. You have friends in the capital …. Do you understand my 
words, Monsieur Fabrice?  
FABRICE , after a moment’s reflection.  
Friends I …yes, I do have friends; but there are other means …surer 
means, which I trust may prove successful. Tell me now…  
(We hear the sound of the Count’s carriage.)  
CASIMIR . 
Let us save our words for later …. I hear a carriage coming …. I shall 
meet you shortly in your room, and there shall instruct you in greater 
detail…. What a frightful din! No question, ’tis  the Count: should vice 
be permitted to strut so boldly?  
FABRICE . 
I only wish your Count would go and lodge with the devil! ’Tis  a 
terrible trade to be an innkeeper and obliged to open your doors to all 
kinds of people …. ’Tis the only aspect of my profession I find 
distasteful.   
SCENE II  
FABRICE, CASIMIR, CHARLES.  
 
CHARLES , to Fabrice.  
Monsieur, two ladies sent by Count Oxtiern have just arrived and 
desire lodgings. The Count himself will be here shortly. He and his 
friend Monsieur Derbac have stopped off a short distance from here, and 
have sent instructions to offer the ladies your best chambers. There are, 
in truth, more than twenty guards escorting the carriage.  
FABRICE , curtly.  
All right, I shall receive them; ’t is here they will lodge …. Not a word, 
Casimir; and when the occasion arises, let us try and help the poor girl: the rewards are such, my friend, that we should never waste the least 
opportunity to perform a good deed whenever we can… . Come with me, 
Charles . 
 
SCENE III 
C
ASIMIR , alone.  
A worthy man! ’Tis  there, none the less, one finds virtue …. In an 
anonymous creature …without any background or breeding. While those 
born to wealth often have naught to offer —their riches 
notwithstanding —save corruption and a w hole host of vices …. But why did the Count not come with Ernestine? …Ah! he is doubtless off 
hatching some plot with Derbac, that most worthy accomplice of his 
debaucheries. But Derbac, less dissolute than the Count, will perhaps 
raise some objections to th is latest and vilest adventure.  
 
SCENE IV  
CASIMIR, FABRICE, ERNESTINE, AMÉLIE . 
 
FABRICE , to Ernestine.  
I trust, Mademoiselle, you will find these lodgings comfortable. I have 
been at great pains to ready them for you, as the Count has instructed 
me to, and  as Mademoiselle deserves.  
ERNESTINE , in deep despair.  
Thank you, Monsieur, thank you. ’Tis  much too good for me; the 
most profound solitude, ’tis  that and only that would really suit me.  
FABRICE . 
Since Mademoiselle wishes to be alone, I shall withdraw and attend to 
other matters which may help make my lodgings more bearable for her.  
CASIMIR , to Ernestine.  
Shall I bring the Count to Mademoiselle’s chambers when he arrives?  ERNESTINE . 
Is he not the lord and master of them? …The master of my entire 
existence? …Leave us, Monsieur, pray do. We wish to be alone.  
 
SCENE V  
ERNESTINE, AMÉLIE . 
 
AMÉLIE . 
This melancholy state of mind wherein I find you worries me, 
Mademoiselle. How pleased I’d be to see you rest a while.  
ERNESTINE . 
Rest? …I rest? Great God, no! …Oh, no! …there can be no further rest 
upon this earth for poor Ernestine.  
AMÉLIE . 
What! You mean to say the barbarous author of your misfortunes can 
do nothing to make amends?  
ERNESTINE . 
For such cruel desecrations there can never be amends, Amélie. 
Reflect for a mom ent how the man, resorting to the most arrant roguery, 
abducted me from my family…from my lover …from everything I hold 
dear in this world. And were you aware that he had this man, this 
worthy Herman whom I love, cast into irons? He has founded his case upon false accusations, resorted to the worst kind of calumnies, made use of informers and traitors. ’Tis  they who have brought the poor man low; 
base gold, and Oxtiern’s crimes, have led to his undoing. Herman is a 
prisoner …perhaps he has already been senten ced…and ’tis upon the very 
chains of the man I love that this cowardly Oxtiern has come to sacrifice 
his wretched victim.  
AMÉLIE . 
Ah, Mademoiselle, your words make me tremble!  
ERNESTINE , in despair.  
What hope is there for me? …What have I to look forward to? Great 
God! What recourse is left to me?  
AMÉLIE . 
But what of your father? … 
ERNESTINE . 
You know that my father had been absent from Stockholm for some 
time when Oxtiern, resorting to cruel deceit, invited me to his house, 
pretending that, were I to come, I  would be helping my lover’s cause and 
obtain not only his release but perhaps his hand as well; Oxtiern’s 
brother, the Senator, was to be there and could use his influence to help 
poor Herman, or so he declared. ’Twas  a venture which, for me, was as 
guilty as ’twas  foolhardy, I realize now. How could I ever have dreamt of 
a betrothal without my father’s consent? Heaven has punished me dearly 
for it …. Do you know whom I discovered there, instead of the protector 
I was expecting? Oxtiern, ravenous Oxtiern, a  dagger in his hand, 
offering me the choice of death or dishonor, nor did he even give me the 
opportunity to make a choice. Had that choice been mine, Amélie, I swear I would not have hesitated for a single moment; the most frightful 
torments would have be en for me sweeter than the loathsome deeds that 
perverted man had prepared for me; frightful bonds prevented me from defending myself… . The scoundrel! …and, as a crowning blow, Heaven 
has seen fit to let me live …the sun still casts its rays upon me, and I a m 
lost! (She slumps into the chair which is near the table.)  
A
MÉLIE , in tears, taking her mistress’ hands.  
O Mademoiselle! most miserable of women, please do not 
despair! …Your father has already been apprised of your departure; do 
you think he will waste a  minute before flying to your defense?  
ERNESTINE . 
’Tis not he I expect to avenge me and punish him who has tortured 
me. 
AMÉLIE . 
And what if the Count were to keep his word? He spoke, or so I was 
given to understand, of cherished ties, eternal bonds …. 
ERNES TINE . 
And even were Oxtiern to desire them, could I ever consent to spend 
my life in the arms of a man I loathe? …a man who has done me the 
most grievous wrong? Can you marry a man by whom you have been 
debased? …Can you ever learn to love what you deem to b e beneath 
contempt? Ah, Amélie, I am lost, irrevocably lost …. All that remain for 
me are sorrow and tears; my only hope is in death: one does not recover from the loss of one’s honor …. From any other hurt, but never from 
that! AMÉLIE , glancing around her.  
Mademoiselle, there is no one here; who stands in our way, or stops 
us from fleeing? from going to beg the Court for its protection, a 
protection you not only merit but which it is your bounden duty to 
claim?  
ERNESTINE , proudly.  
Were Oxtiern a thousand lea gues away, I would do everything in my 
power to shorten the distance between us, nor would I lift a finger to 
flee. The traitor has dishonored me; I must avenge myself. I shall not fly to any corruption- ridden Court to ask for a protection which would be 
denied me; you have no inkling, Amélie, to what extent wealth and 
influence debase the souls of those who dwell in that house of horror! 
Monsters! I perhaps would be merely one further morsel for their 
dreadful desires!  
 
SCENE VI  
THE ABOVE, AND FABRICE.  
 
F
ABRICE , seemingly sad, but with an interested air.  
The Count has sent word that an important affair has detained him 
not far from here, but that he will be here shortly. Is there anything Mademoiselle desires meanwhile?  ERNESTINE , pointing to the room she t hinks is hers.  
This is my room, is it not, Monsieur?  
FABRICE , as before.  
It is, Mademoiselle.  
ERNESTINE . 
Then I should like to retire to it …. Come, Amélie, come and let us 
ponder the important plans before us, plans which alone are capable of 
giving your p oor mistress any respite from her torments.  
 
SCENE VII  
FABRICE , alone.  
Casimir was quite right, this girl is beautiful, she is charming …. Ah! 
Monsieur le Comte, how guilty you are to have been the instrument of this young lady’s destruction; should she, wh o so deserves to be the 
object of your affection, be turned into the object of your villainy and brutality? But here he comes; not another word. Traitors cannot bear the truth; they, more than any other kind, are receptive to flattery, and 
consciously desire it; even they find crime so repulsive that, in order to 
steel themselves to the necessity of being evil, they like to be thought of, 
and constantly painted, as paragons of virtue.  
 SCENE VIII 
FABRICE, COUNT OXTIERN.  
 
OXTIERN . 
How can I ever thank you, m y dear Fabrice! Your friendship, your 
affection of long standing, are ever more clearly in evidence. Words 
cannot express my gratitude.  
FABRICE , with a straightforward and affectionate air.  
A trifle more candor, Monsieur, and a trifle less gratitude. Pray spare 
me any gratitude which would be purchased at the cost of an ill deed, ’twould  debase me. Be frank with me, Monsieur: who is the young lady 
you have brought here, and what do you intend to do with her?  
O
XTIERN , quickly interrupting.  
My intentions are honorable, Monsieur. Ernestine is a seemly young 
lady, whom I am not keeping here by force. Perhaps I did allow myself to be carried away by an excess of love, and hasten the day which will 
join us forever; but she must be my wife, and indeed she will, my friend. 
Would I dare to consider her otherwise, and would I bring her here, ’neath your roof, if such was not my intention? 
F
ABRICE . 
’Tis not the story people have been telling, Monsieur. Still, I must 
believe you. If you are deceiving me, however, I shall  no longer be able to 
offer you my hospitality.  OXTIERN . 
Given the virtuous motives which prompt them, Fabrice, I forgive you 
your suspicions. But set your mind at ease, my friend, let me say it again. 
My plans are as pure as she who inspires them in me.  
FABRICE . 
You are a noble lord, Count, I know. But please be convinced of this: 
that the moment your conduct renders you base in my eyes, I shall cease 
to regard you as anything but a man all the more contemptible because 
he was born to be honest; and, havin g been blessed, more than most 
men, with marks of distinction which ought to be deserving of esteem 
and respect, such a man is, at the same time, all the more guilty for not 
having profited from them.  
OXTIERN . 
Fabrice, why all this concern? What have I don e to deserve such 
suspicion? 
FABRICE . 
Nothing yet, or so I am willing to believe …. Where do you plan to 
take this girl?  
OXTIERN . 
To my estate near Norrköping, and there I shall marry her the 
moment we arrive.  
FABRICE . 
Why is her father not with her?  OXTIERN . 
He was not in Stockholm when she left; and the force of my love did 
not allow me to tarry over formalities …with which I thought I could 
easily dispense: how strict you are, my friend …I have never seen you so 
stern before.  
FABRICE . 
’Tis not a matter of b eing stern, Monsieur, ’tis a matter of justice; 
would you, were you a father, consent to see your daughter abducted? 
OXTIERN . 
I would not like to have her dishonored; but will Ernestine be 
dishonored when I marry her?  
 
SCENE IX  
THE ABOVE, AMÉLIE . 
 
AMÉLIE . 
Gentlemen, Mademoiselle requests that you move to another room; 
she’s resting at present, and would like … 
OXTIERN , warmly.  
Please assure her, my dear Amélie, that we shall comply with her 
request. Is there anything in the world I desire more than the peace and 
happiness of my mistress?  AMÉLIE . 
Ah! Monsieur, and yet how far she is from either!  
OXTIERN , to Fabrice, without paying any attention to what Amélie has 
just said.  
Come, Fabrice, I wish to finish convincing you that my soul has never 
entertained any p rinciples of a sort which might afflict yours …. Amélie, 
please tell Ernestine to let me know when she will receive me. ( She exits. 
To Fabrice .) Come, my friend, let us go.  
FABRICE , alone.  
I shall follow shortly …. I, the friend of that man? Oh, no, 
never! …W ere he to give me his entire fortune I should still not be his 
friend …. Through Casimir privy to the affair, I can now be of some use 
to Ernestine; let us hasten to Stockholm. He is not leaving until 
tomorrow; I still have time. I must save this poor girl or lose my life in 
the attempt: honor and probity make it my bounden duty; these are the 
most sacred laws of my heart.  
 
END OF ACT I  
   
Act Two  
 
SCENE I  
OXTIERN, DERBAC. 
 
OXTIERN . 
This creature is of a sensibility which is … 
DERBAC . 
Most stimulating, is it not? How charming women are whenever tears 
appear and endow their features with the full disorder of sorrow …. You, 
my dear Count, are what may be termed a thoroughly corrupt man …. 
OXTIERN . 
What do you expect, my friend? ’twas  from the ways of women that I 
learned all the vices wherewith I ravage them today.  
DERBAC . 
I assume you plan to marry her?  
OXTIERN . 
Can you suspect me for one moment of being so ridiculous?  DERBAC . 
But once you are in your château, what excuse can you offer Ernestine 
to justify your conduct? She will never allow you to live with her as a 
lover with his mistress.  
OXTIERN . 
Oh! her intentions, her desires, her wishes are the things which 
concern me least of all. My happiness, my satisfaction: there is the goal, 
Derbac, and the goal is attained; in an adventure such as this, the 
moment I am happy, everyone must be happy.  
DERBAC . 
Ah! my friend …my dear Count, allow me to dispute for a moment 
principles as dangerous as these!  
OXTIERN . 
No, you would only displease me without convincing me …. Neve r 
forget that your fortune depends upon mine, and that what I expect you 
to be is an agent for furthering my plans, not a censor.  
DERBAC . 
I flattered myself that, considering me only as a friend, you would 
want my advice …. What you are contriving is fright ful. 
OXTIERN . 
In your eyes, it may well be; because you are a lackey, full of Gothic 
prejudices …upon which the light of philosophy has not yet managed to 
direct its rays …. A few more years at my school, Derbac, and you will no 
longer pity a woman for such a peccadillo.  DERBAC . 
The sweet, sensitive creature who, for our happiness even more than 
for her own, has been able to bestow, with such refinement, all her glory 
and all her felicity in her virtue, has very clear claims to our love and our 
protection, wh en scoundrels despoil it.  
OXTIERN . 
Ah! you’re moralizing, Derbac!  
DERBAC . 
And what if I am? Let us dwell solely upon the dangers to you; do you 
not see any dangers to yourself in this affair? …The Colonel, the 
Colonel’s son …or young Herman, whom this charming girl loves so 
tenderly: do you fear nothing from any of these people?  
OXTIERN . 
The Colonel is old, he will not put up much of a fight …in fact he 
won’t fight at all …. His son will never get to me; I’m having him 
followed; (In a low voice.) if he even ven tures close to my estate, my 
friend, he’s as good as dead. (Aloud.)  As for Herman, the chains in which 
I have him languishing are not of a sort to be broken. I had the foresight to implicate him in an important affair, from which he will not be able to dis entangle himself without a considerable fortune, which he is far 
from possessing. It cost me a pretty penny …false witnesses …corrupt 
judges; I defy him to extricate himself from it …. 
D
ERBAC . 
And what of the law, my friend, what of the law?  OXTIERN . 
I have n ever known the law to resist the power of gold.  
DERBAC . 
And what of the voice within, wherein virtue has always been able to 
claim its due? …I mean your conscience.  
OXTIERN . 
Clear …perfectly unperturbed.  
DERBAC . 
But the Court, my dear Count, that Court of wh ich you are the proud 
adornment and delight …. What if the Court were to learn of your 
conduct?  
OXTIERN . 
That is the only thing I fear from this furious girl; she threatened me, 
which is why I must keep a close watch on her. Remember to give orders 
that eve rything be in readiness tomorrow at dawn; I wish to get away 
from Stockholm as soon as possible. Fabrice is turning virtuous, and we 
are still too close to the capital for me not to have some qualms about 
such a knave’s remorse; I know nothing more terribl e or more 
humiliating than the necessity to treat such rascals with consideration 
whenever one has need of them. ’Tis  the obligation of crime; but, Good 
God, my friend, ’tis  the torment of pride; to convert Fabrice, I have 
dispatched my valet as an influen ce upon him. And would you believe it? 
Casimir himself is not as solid as I had thought; you have no idea, my 
friend, of the effect a girl’s tears can have upon all these weak and 
vacillating souls.  DERBAC . 
Fortunately for humanity, there are only a few as  perverted as yours ! 
OXTIERN . 
Because I have worked at it, my friend; I have witnessed much, 
experienced much; if you had any idea whither a surfeit of experience can 
lead one ! 
DERBAC . 
I hear some noise from Ernestine’s quarters …. Here comes Amélie. 
I’ll w ager they want you …. Lucky creature!  
OXTIERN . 
I’ve already told you: the only way to a woman’s heart is along the 
path of torment. I know none other as sure.  
 
SCENE II  
THE ABOVE, AMÉLIE . 
 
AMÉLIE , to the Count.  
Mademoiselle Ernestine would like to join you in this room, 
Monsieur, to speak to you for a few minutes, if you have nothing more 
pressing.  OXTIERN . 
Can there be anything more sacred…what am I saying, anything 
dearer to me than conversing with your lovely mistress? Amélie, tell her I 
await her with lo ve…with a lover’s impatience.  
AMÉLIE , surprise mingled with anger.  
You, Monsieur?  
OXTIERN . 
Yes, I. Do my sentiments surprise you?  
AMÉLIE . 
Oh, no, Monsieur, assuredly not; nothing any longer surprises me 
about you. Mademoiselle will be here shortly, I shall tell her you’re 
expecting her.  
 
SCENE III 
OXTIERN, DERBAC. 
 
DERBAC . 
That girl knows you, my friend, and I can read on her face the 
expressions which reveal to me every movement of her mistress’ soul.  
OXTIERN . 
How can one tremble because of the movements of a woman’s soul? 
Poor Derbac, your fears make me laugh …. Off with you now, go see to the preparations for our journey; remember that we are still not in port, 
that we must reach it, and reach it safely.  
DERBAC . 
I dread the reefs more than you do, and I st ill suspect that this 
business is far from finished.  
OXTIERN . 
Fear not. (Touching his forehead.)  There are, in here, more ruses than 
were needed to set all Europe aflame; given which, judge whether I 
should be concerned over one little intrigue.  
DERBAC , vehemently.  
Ah, my dear Count …adieu …since you want from me neither 
reproaches nor counsel, then perhaps you shall not have me long as a 
friend. ( He exits .) 
 
SCENE IV  
OXTIERN , alone . 
I pity all these people; a mere nothing upsets them and chills their 
ardor; I reveal my soul to none of them …. Let us keep up the pretense 
with Ernestine …. Angelic child …There are times when the sentiments 
you inspire in me threaten to weaken my resolution…moments when, instead of betraying you as I should, I can think only of adoring you. Ah! 
no faltering now; Ernestine has been used too ill not to be feared, and if I redeem her I am lost.   
SCENE V  
OXTIERN, ERNESTINE. 
 
ERNESTINE . 
However painful it is for me to appear before you, Monsieur, 
whatever humiliation I may feel in your p resence, it is none the less 
necessary for me to ask you, following the horrible deed you have 
perpetrated, what satisfaction your probity can offer me.  
OXTIERN . 
Is it my probity that should be questioned, Ernestine, when ’tis  my 
heart that you hold captiv e…a heart that is wholly yours?  
ERNESTINE . 
I trust you do not imagine that this gift can assure my happiness …. 
What reason can you have for proposing it to me? …How, after the 
baseness wherein you have wallowed, can you think that savage heart 
worthy of me?  
OXTIERN . 
I am grieved by your reproaches, all the more so since I confess I merit 
them…. Ah ! do not punish so cruelly the failings of love!  
ERNESTINE . 
Of love! …You? O God ! if this is what love inspires, let my heart be 
forever free from any feeling so cap able of defiling man! …No, Monsieur, that is in no wise love; that is not the comforting sentiment, the basis for 
all good works …; would it counsel crimes?  
OXTIERN . 
My conduct was reprehensible, I must confess; but I adored you, and I 
had a rival.  
ERNESTINE , firmly.  
Monster, what have you done to this rival?  
OXTIERN . 
’Tis not I who determined his fate.  
ERNESTINE . 
You alone stole him from me; you alone must return him to me.  
OXTIERN . 
’Twas  not my hand that deprived you of him, Ernestine. The laws 
were evoked and applied, and under them Herman has been sent to 
prison. All I can do is use my influence to render the harshness of his 
chains more bearable.  
ERNESTINE . 
What! ’Twas  you who forged them! How can I so deceive myself that 
now I stoop to ask that you break  them! …Begone, I want nothing from 
you…. I, offer you the chance to do something generous? …the means 
wherewith to blot your horrors from my mind? …You see, Oxtiern, I am 
losing my mind …. All right, what do you intend to do with your 
victim?…Tell me, where a re you taking me? … OXTIERN . 
I offer you, Ernestine, both my hand and my heart.  
ERNESTINE . 
Enchain myself to my torturer? …Never, never!  
OXTIERN . 
’Tis not as though there were another choice; is there?  
ERNESTINE . 
Ah, indeed there is …. Have you failed to divine it, Monsieur? Have 
you forgotten that I still have a father? …And a brother? (With great 
pride.)  Have you forgotten that I still live and breathe?  
OXTIERN . 
All these cruel courses would serve no end; they would only result in 
bloodshed and would in no wise restore your honor. Only he whom you 
accuse of having taken it from you can return it to you. Consent to be his 
wife, and all is forgotten.  
ERNESTINE , as emphatically as possible.  
Traitor, what match can you propose to me now that you have 
dishonored me ? I would remain caught forever between opprobrium and 
humiliation, a constant prey to grief and tears, trying to captivate my 
husband in ties he shall have formed solely out of duty. Tell me, 
Oxtiern, what moments of peace or contentment can I look forwar d to 
upon this earth? hate and despair on the one hand, constraint and 
remorse on the other. For us, the marriage tapers would be lighted from the torches of the Furies, serpents would form the bonds between us, 
and death would be our only salvation.  
OXTIE RN, casting himself at Ernestine’s knees.  
If this be so, then —since ’tis I alone who deserve it —strike, 
Ernestine, here is my heart; with your hands, spill this guilty blood, 
which is no longer worthy to sustain a creature barbarous enough to have 
misjudge d you so cruelly.  
ERNESTINE , repelling him even more forcefully.  
Then let it be spilled without wetting the ground; otherwise, ’twould  
cause crimes to sprout up.  
OXTIERN . 
What is’t then you want, Ernestine, and what can I do to prove you 
my love and earn your forgiveness?  
ERNESTINE , showing anger, scorn, and strength.  
Your love, never! …As for your repentance, that I shall believe when 
you break the irons wherewith, thanks to your villainy, my lover is 
fettered: go and confess your plots to the judges; go and meet the death 
your crimes deserve; burden the earth no more with a weight which 
wearies it; the sun is less pure since for shedding light upon your days.  
OXTIERN , with controlled pride.  
Ernestine is forgetting —or am I mistaken? —the situation wherein 
she finds herself?  ERNESTINE , nobly and energetically.  
You are right, Oxtiern; were I to dwell upon it, either I would cease to 
live or you would die.  
OXTIERN . 
When a woman believes herself to be unhappy, she should make some 
slight effort to deal tactfully with him upon whom her destiny depends.  
ERNESTINE , proudly.  
This woman depends only upon herself; she is responsible only to 
herself; she alone will determine her fate.  
OXTIERN . 
Let us pursue our route, Ernestine; tomorrow we shall reach one of 
my estates; there perhaps I shall succeed in mollifying and calming you.  
ERNESTINE , as above.  
No, I am going no farther; it was in spite of myself that you decoyed 
me here; here I must be avenged, or here I shall die.  
OXTIERN . 
These outbursts of a frenzied soul tire y ou and remedy nothing, 
Ernestine; I was hoping from you less hate …a more complete 
resignation.   
SCENE VI  
This scene must move at a very rapid pace.  
THE ABOVE, AMÉLIE , CASIMIR.  
Each takes his master aside in one corner of the stage.  
 
CASIMIR , to Oxtiern.  
Monsieur?  
OXTIERN . 
What is it, Casimir?  
AMÉLIE , entering slightly after the others.  
Mademoiselle?  
ERNESTINE . 
Have you come to apprise me of still further reverses?  
CASIMIR , to Oxtiern.  
An officer has just arrived at this inn.  
AMÉLIE , to Ernestine.  
A soldier,  whom I haven’t yet seen, requests most earnestly to speak 
with you.  OXTIERN . 
Try to discover who it might be.  
ERNESTINE , to Amélie, with a show of joy.  
’Tis my father! He must have received my note, and he’s arrived!  
CASIMIR , to Oxtiern.  
Monsieur, do not come out; ’tis  essential you not see this man.  
OXTIERN , to Ernestine.  
Excuse me, urgent matters summon me. Is it too much to hope that 
when next we meet I may find you a trifle calmer?  
ERNESTINE , nobly and steadfastly.  
Yes, yes, you may count on me, Monsie ur; never again will you see me 
in the character you must imagine mine to be …. You doubtless thought 
me beneath contempt, that much at least your conduct has proved to me; 
soon you will confess that I was worthy of your esteem.  
OXTIERN , exiting.  
You will a lways be worthy of my heart!   
SCENE VII  
ERNESTINE, AMÉLIE . 
 
ERNESTINE , very rapidly.  
Fly, Amélie, and learn who this stranger is …. Heavens! if ’twere  my 
father!  
AMÉLIE , leaving in great haste.  
May he come and put an end to all our woes!  
 
SCENE VIII 
ERNESTINE , alone.  
O height of misfortune and immodesty! Between Oxtiern and myself, 
we offer the picture of the one and the other ! I dare defy the hand of fate 
to place upon earth both a creature more to be pitied than I and one 
more shameless than he …. He offers  me his hand to compensate for the 
wrongs into which his villainy has plunged me …were I to accept it, I 
should but finish the work he has so basely begun. No, no, Oxtiern, ’tis  
not your hand I want, ’tis  your head; only your death can assuage the 
state to which your savagery has reduced me.   
SCENE IX  
ERNESTINE, COLONEL FALKENHEIM.  
 
ERNESTINE , rushing toward him, then immediately backing away 
fearfully.  
Father …oh, Father! I am no longer worthy of you!  
THE COLONEL . 
What is this I hear?  
ERNESTINE , painfully.  
Why did you leave me, Father? baleful voyage …wretched event …The 
cruel man: he chose the time when you were gone …he deceived me; he 
led me to believe he could give me the happiness that you were hesitant 
to grant me; and, taking advantage of my weakness, he has rendered me 
unworthy both of you and of life itself.  
THE COLONEL . 
Unjust Heaven! didst Thou prolong my days only to have me witness 
such an abomination? The traitor must die …. (He attempts to exit.)  
ERNESTINE , stopping him.  
No, no, vengeance must be mine and mine alone, I shall attend to it 
myself.  THE COLONEL . 
Your plans alarm me!  
ERNESTINE , rapidly.  
Do not try to unravel them, they are just and right …proud as the soul 
you bequeathed me …. I shall discover them to you when the time is 
ripe. Have you seen him, Father? Did he dare present himself to you?  
THE COLONEL . 
He was careful not to; a single glance from me would have reduced 
him to nothing.  
ERNESTINE . 
You learned of my flight through my note?  
THE COLONEL . 
’Twas  your note that hastened my steps hithe r. 
ERNESTINE , rapidly.  
Oh! Father, have you ever doubted me for a moment?  
THE COLONEL . 
Never; but you left no protectors behind.  
ERNESTINE . 
Do the poor and downtrodden ever have any defenders? Oxtiern is 
rich, he is influential; we were virtuous and poor …. Oh yes, Father, oh 
yes, he had to be right …. And poor Herman, have you any news of him?  THE COLONEL . 
I heard tell of a bankruptcy in which he was implicated; this wretched 
affair, so I have been informed, will cost a small fortune to settle, and we 
have n one. 
ERNESTINE , aside.  
Oxtiern, Oxtiern, so this is how you take revenge upon a rival!  
THE COLONEL . 
If only I had consented to your marriage! My cruel refusals are the 
cause of everything!  
ERNESTINE . 
You deemed them just; is that not all I require to make me erase from 
my mind the ill they have done me? Who better than the author of our 
days can judge what is best for us? …Forgive me, Father, I beg of you to 
withdraw for a moment, I haven’t a minute to lose. At dawn we’re 
leaving for the Count’s château, and  tomorrow I shall perhaps be 
enchained forever unless I succeed in freeing myself today …. Keep away 
from Oxtiern, avoid seeing him …. Fabrice, the innkeeper, seems to me a 
worthy man. Ask him to conceal you, and leave the rest to me.  
THE COLONEL , worried.  
Fabrice was not here when I arrived; I was told he had gone to 
Stockholm on important business, but that he was expected back before 
tomorrow morning.  ERNESTINE , perturbed.  
Fabrice gone! …Could I have been mistaken? Gone to Stockholm? 
What business can he have there? Could the Count have sent him? He’s 
known him for a long time! …With what new bond am I about to be 
shackled? Everything takes me unawares! Everything terrifies me!  
THE COLONEL , with a display of nobility and strength.  
Don’t worry, Ernestine, your  father will not desert you again; dear, 
unhappy child, either we shall emerge triumphant together or we shall 
be destroyed in each other’s arms. Adieu; let Amélie keep me informed if 
you should have the slightest need of me. And remember that the scion 
of Charles XII’s favorite is perforce a man born to sustain the honor and 
glory of his family.  
 
SCENE X  
ERNESTINE , alone.  
There is but a single means whereby to satisfy me, Oxtiern: ’tis  that 
you must spill my blood, or that I must shed yours to the last dro p…. 
Now, let us pen a note. (She sits at the table and reads aloud as she writes:) “A decent man does not outrage a virtuous girl with impunity; you know 
the rules of honor, abide by them; the opponent I offer you is full worthy 
to engage you in a duel; it  will take place in the garden of this hostelry, 
with swords the choice of weapons; rendezvous this evening at eleven at 
the appointed spot; a young man clothed in white will appear before you; 
attack him stoutly, he will respond in like measure; bear in m ind that 
one of you must die, Oxtiern; be as brave as you have been base; upon this condition alone shall Ernestine forgive you. Adieu.” (She seals her 
note, then rings.)  
 
SCENE XI  
ERNESTINE, AMÉLIE . 
 
AMÉLIE , hurrying in.  
May I be of service, Mademoiselle?  
ERNESTINE , rapidly.  
Go take this note to the Count …. Take care that he does not see my 
father …. Hold, I’m going to retire. Go fetch the Colonel, bring him to 
this room and have him wait here while you are delivering my note; this errand, Amélie, is as imp ortant as it is secret; mind you not to overlook 
the slightest detail. (She exits.)  
 
SCENE XII  
A
MÉLIE , alone.  
This note worries me; her expression when she gave it to me; the 
manner in which she has held forth to me about her brother upon occasion in the p ast; I’ll warrant she’s asking him to come here, that 
she’ll have him challenge the Count to a duel…. I must warn the Colonel …they are his children. I should never forgive myself for 
concealing from him what I suspect. Good Lord, what unhappiness the base maneuvers of a scoundrel can cause! (She starts to exit and meets the 
Colonel.)  
 
SCENE XIII  
AMÉLIE , THE COLONEL.  
 
AMÉLIE . 
Oh! Monsieur, your daughter begs you to remain for a short time in 
this room while I take this message to Count Oxtiern.  
THE COLONEL . 
What does it say?  
AMÉLIE . 
I don’t know; but it must be a matter of great importance, for 
Mademoiselle enjoined me to give it my most urgent attention.  
THE COLONEL . 
And you have no notion what it contains? 
AMÉLIE . 
Excuse me, I think it’s about a duel; Monsi eur your 
son…Mademoiselle your daughter …Count Oxtiern…  
THE COLONEL . 
My son? Pray be more explicit, I don’t understand you.  AMÉLIE , eagerly.  
Monsieur, I’ll wager that Mademoiselle, your daughter, is summoning 
your son to seek revenge; that by this note she is challenging the Count 
to a duel, with your son as the Count’s opponent …. Oh ! Monsieur, is 
there not some other way to punish such a crime, without risking your 
son’s life?  
THE COLONEL . 
There are doubtless other ways …most assuredly there are. No 
matter …go and deliver this note. Do as your mistress has prescribed, 
and count upon me to take care of the rest in proper manner. (Calling 
her back impatiently.) Amélie, if my son should arrive, should it be 
learned he is anywhere near this inn, make certain he sp eaks to no one. 
Have him brought to me immediately. On this point, give the strictest 
orders.  
AMÉLIE , exiting.  
Yes, Monsieur, I shall, of that you can be sure. I understand the full 
importance of your instructions.  
 
SCENE XIV  
THE COLONEL , alone.  
My son wil l not fight a duel; ’tis  up to me alone to clear this stain…. 
Oh, daughter, daughter, your defense is my concern, no one else’s …. I 
shall test my courage with this hateful man, and we shall see whether 
this hand, trained in combat …guided by the more justified cry for revenge, will be steadied by the God who is the protector of honor! Let 
us go apprise the Count of these resolutions, but let us keep them a 
secret from my daughter…. I want her to learn of the duel only by my 
victory. Yes, my victory is certai n; ’tis a monster I am going to punish, 
and Providence is too wise to allow Virtue to be crushed beneath the 
perfidious assaults of vice and villainy.  
 
END OF ACT II  
   
Act Three  
 
The stage represents the garden of the hostelry. Throughout the act, the lig ht 
slowly fades, so that, at the denouement, the stage is enveloped in total 
darkness.  
 
SCENE I  
OXTIERN, DERBAC. 
At the start of this scene, the delivery is prolonged and mysterious.  
 
DERBAC . 
I asked you to step down here into the garden, my dear Count, in 
order to converse with you more privily. There are all sorts of agitation 
in this house; and since the arrival of Colonel Falkenheim, Ernestine has 
locked herself in her room and refuses to see anyone; Amélie is everywhere at once; and Casimir, who is fol lowing every move, informs 
me of the most extraordinary things.  
O
XTIERN . 
What is it you suspect then? DERBAC . 
I suspect nothing, my friend, I know everything. Begin by reading this 
note, if the little daylight remaining allows you to. Amélie was supposed 
to deliver it to you; not finding you, she left it with Casimir, with 
instructions that it be given to you with all possible haste: I took it from 
your valet’s hands …and I read it.  
OXTIERN , casting his eye over the note, pauses at the following words:  
“The opponent I offer you is full worthy to engage you in a duel ….” 
Do you know who this opponent is?  
DERBAC . 
I think I can guess.  
OXTIERN . 
Who is it then?  
DERBAC . 
Ernestine herself.  
OXTIERN . 
Ernestine?  
DERBAC . 
I’m quite certain.  
OXTIERN . 
What proof of this abs urdity do you have?  DERBAC . 
I saw the manservant of the inn carrying with his own two hands the 
white raiment to which the note refers. He was taking it to Amélie, who 
was supposed to give it to Ernestine. And ’tis  in this guise she will come 
to do battle with you herself.  
OXTIERN . 
’Tis inconceivable, such a plan, motivated by rage …and by despair. 
We must avenge ourselves for it, and nothing could be easier.  
DERBAC . 
But the Colonel who is here … 
OXTIERN . 
Even were there ten colonels, this creature is plottin g to kill me, and I 
must forestall her. I refuse to fight a duel with her, I would only kill her, 
and I want her to live …to live to rue the day she plotted my downfall. If 
she thwarts my plans, I am lost. She will cast herself at the feet of the King, and disgrace me; all my wealth and possessions, my position, my influence, will be wiped out, everything. Therefore, I have no choice but 
to…Take a look, Derbac, at who is walking toward us through this 
thicket.  
D
ERBAC . 
’Tis Casimir.  (The light gradually fades .) 
 
SCENE II  
THE ABOVE, CASIMIR.  
 
CASIMIR . 
Colonel Falkenheim has just ordered me to deliver this note to you 
without delay, Count.  
OXTIERN . 
Give it to me. (He reads it quickly; then, signaling to Casimir to leave 
them, he goes over to Derbac and, mysterio usly, says.) My friend, ’tis  a 
challenge from Ernestine’s father. Knowing that his daughter is arming 
her brother against me, he does not wish to yield to anyone the honor of so necessary a revenge. He is coming down to this garden and requests 
that I awai t him here, to engage him in a duel. You see, you were 
mistaken; Ernestine’s brother must have slipped into the inn 
unbeknownst to us: ’tis  he the opponent she has picked for me, and the 
white garb was to serve him as a disguise. (Waxing more and more wild , 
and increasingly emphatic.)  Embrace me, my friends; we were looking for 
means to rid ourselves of this girl, and now fate offers us an unparalleled 
opportunity. (More coldly.)  Casimir, go and tell the Colonel that I await 
him. By then it will be dark …. T ell him I shall be dressed in white; that 
he should attack without consideration the person he sees in the 
shadows, clothed in this garb.  CASIMIR , trying to calm his master.  
Monsieur, Monsieur.  
OXTIERN . 
Quiet, you knavish lout; if it makes you tremble, the n begone with 
you! 
CASIMIR . 
I shall do as you say. The Colonel shall be informed that his enemy, 
clothed in white, will appear at the appointed time and place. (Aside.) I 
only hope Fabrice returns before a crime so horrible is committed. 
(Approaching.) Monsieur, if you would permit me to say one word.  
DERBAC . 
Speak up, my friend, tell us what you know.  
CASIMIR . 
The white garment is not for Ernestine’s brother; I am certain her 
brother has not entered the house. I have kept a close lookout on every 
new arriv al, and I swear to you that this young man, whom I know 
perfectly well, was not among them; this garment is for Ernestine, of 
that you can be sure; the servant of the house, who, thanks to your gold, 
has been won to our side, was sent to fetch it somewhere  in the 
neighborhood. And ’tis  to Ernestine herself they are supposed to give it.  
DERBAC , very emphatically.  
That clarifies everything. You see what the plan is, Oxtiern: 
Ernestine, to conceal her plans from her father, told the Colonel that she was counting on her brother to redress her wrongs; the Colonel believed 
her; he doesn’t want his son to fight a duel, and is coming in his stead.  
OXTIERN , very keenly.  
And will Ernestine also come?  
DERBAC . 
It would seem likely.  
OXTIERN . 
And will she come dressed in white?  
CASIMIR . 
That much is certain, Monsieur.  
DERBAC , with a cry of horror.  
What! you intend to have the girl murdered by her own father!  
OXTIERN . 
Quiet ! Don’t you see, my friends, ’tis  fate that has come to offer me 
these means of punishment; and you op pose my taking advantage of 
them? 
DERBAC . 
The crime is execrable; it revolts me.  
OXTIERN . 
’Tis useful for my tranquillity.   
SCENE III 
OXTIERN, DERBAC. 
 
OXTIERN . 
I’m losing patience with that valet. He lacks steadfastness of purpose. 
These imbeciles have no  principles. Anything that deviates even slightly 
from the beaten paths of vice or villainy amazes them; the thought of 
remorse terrifies them.  
DERBAC , sharply.  
Woe unto scoundrels whom remorse does not check! woe unto you if 
you persist in your plans; nev er was a crime more foul conceived, even in 
hell. 
OXTIERN . 
I agree, but it serves my purpose …. Did this proud creature not plot 
my downfall?  
DERBAC . 
She engaged you in a duel; she was risking her own life.  
OXTIERN . 
Playing the heroine …I dislike any show of pride in a woman.  DERBAC , with considerable feeling.  
Ah! is the creature who most deserves our respect not entitled to 
display any pride?  
OXTIERN . 
Ah, there you go moralizing again; the minute I turn my back on you, 
you begin to lose your grip, and ’tis  all I can do to bring you round 
again …. Come now, Derbac, a little backbone; lest Casimir fail to carry 
out my orders as he should, I want you to carry them out as well; the 
Colonel will be here shortly; tell him to throw himself ardently at the 
enemy whom he will see advancing toward him clothed in white: it will be his daughter …. Do you understand, Derbac? and I shall be avenged. 
(He exits.) 
 
SCENE IV  
D
ERBAC , alone.  
No, I cannot bring myself to serve such a loathsome deed; let Casimir 
be responsible for it , and let us not become involved in this horror. I 
want to leave this man’s company …. I shall revert to my former poverty, 
from which his influence rescued me, and ’tis  greatly to be regretted, no 
doubt; but ’tis  better than the misfortune of further corrupting myself at 
his unworthy school; the lack of fortune frightens me less than does 
crime: suffer as he may, the honest man finds solace in his heart …. (He 
exits as soon as he sees someone coming.)   
SCENE V  
THE COLONEL , groping his way in the shadows.  
’Tis here the duel is supposed to take place. I thought he had preceded 
me; he will doubtless be here shortly… . O you unhappy person, what are 
you going to do? …The cruel laws of honor, how unfair you are! Why 
must the offended party risk life and limb, when ’ tis the aggressor who is 
guilty?…Ah, let him kill me, slice me to shreds, I cannot survive my 
disgrace! (He trembles.) I think I hear him coming …and why is it that 
the approach of this opponent gives rise to feelings I cannot control? yet 
I have never known fear; the desire for vengeance troubles me and 
prevents me from distinguishing the real source of the impressions to 
which I am prey: the night is growing so dark I shall be hard put to recognize the color of the clothing I was told he would be wearing. 
(What follows is said very softly, and above all so that Ernestine cannot hear it.) ’Tis he; let us attack him in silence and not noise the duel abroad. 
(He draws his sword and falls upon Ernestine, who is dressed in man’s 
clothing, of the color referred to before. Scarcely has the duel begun when we 
hear two pistol shots off -stage, one of which is Herman’s and the other the 
Count’s; Herman rushes in, having just killed Oxtiern. Fabrice dashes in a 
moment later.)   
SCENE VI  
THE COLONEL, ERNESTINE, HERMAN, FA BRICE.  
The rhythm of this scene is extremely rapid.  
 
HERMAN , still off -stage.  
Die, traitor, Ernestine is avenged. (Flying to separate the duelists.)  
Merciful Heaven, stop! Do you realize whose blood you were about to 
spill? Wretched father! don’t you know your own daughter?  
ERNESTINE , discarding her sword.  
Oh, God! (She throws herself in her father’s arms.)  
THE COLONEL . 
Dear, unhappy child!  
FABRICE , entering and with great feeling.  
Your troubles are over, Colonel. No sooner had I learned of the 
Count’s wick ed schemes than I flew to Stockholm, freed your young 
friend from the chains wherein Oxtiern had held him captive: you see to what use he has put his first moments of freedom.  
H
ERMAN . 
The coward; his defeat has cost me but little; ’tis  so easy to triumph 
over a traitor. Having emerged victorious, I hastened hither, Monsieur, 
to apprise you of the crimes of which, despite yourselves, he was making you the instrument, and to ask you for the hand of this beloved girl, 
which I still covet and which, I dare flat ter myself, I now deserve.  
The Colonel makes a gesture half of approbation, half of sorrow.  
ERNESTINE , to Herman.  
Can I still hope for such happiness?  
HERMAN , to Ernestine, tenderly.  
Ah! could the crimes of a villain such as Oxtiern wither Nature’s most 
beautiful handiwork?  
THE COLONEL . 
Oh! Fabrice, my debt to you is great. How can I ever repay you? … 
FABRICE . 
By your friendship, my friends, ’tis  what I am due. I put my money to 
the best use possible …. To punish crime and reward virtue …. Let 
someone tell me whether ’twere  possible to invest it at a higher rate of 
interest! … 
 
END OF THE THIRD AND FINAL ACT   
Ernestine, A Swedish Tale (1788)  
After Italy, England, and Russia, few countries in Europe seem to me as 
intriguing as Sweden. But if my imagination was burning to see the celebrated countries whence came, in times past, such legendary heroes 
as Alaric, Attila, and Theodoric —in short all those heroes who, followed 
by countless numbers of soldiers, did proper obeisance to the imperial 
eagle whose wings were  aspiring to embrace the world, those heroes who 
caused the Romans to tremble at the very gates of their mighty capital—if indeed my soul was consumed with a burning desire to visit the country of Gustavus Vasa, of Christina, and of Charles XII …all three o f 
whom owe their fame to very different sources, since the first is 
renowned for that quality —rare and much to be desired in a sovereign—
of a philosophic turn of mind, for that estimable prudence which rides 
roughshod over any religious systems whenever th ey impinge upon the 
authority of the government to which they are presumed to be 
subservient, and upon the happiness of the people, which is the sole 
object of legislation;
1 the second for that nobility of soul which causes 
one to prefer solitude and a lov e of literature to the vainglory of the 
1 Gustavus Vasa, having seen that the Roman clergy, by nature despotic and 
seditious, was encroaching  upon Royal authority, and that by its ordinary vexations 
was ruining the people whenever restraints were not placed upon it, introduced 
Protestantism into Sweden, after having restored to the people the great wealth and 
lands which the priests had taken f rom them.                                           throne; and the third for those heroic virtues which make him forever 
deserving of the surname Alexander —if, I say, I was prompted by all 
these various objects of my admiration, fancy then how much more ardent was my  desire to become acquainted with and admire this wise, 
virtuous, sober, and magnanimous people whom we may properly term 
the model of the North.  
’Twas  with this in mind that I left Paris the 20th of July, 1774, and 
after having traveled through Holland, W estphalia, and Denmark, I 
arrived in Sweden toward the middle of the following year.  
After I had spent some three months in Stockholm, my curiosity was 
directed toward those famous mines about which I had read so much and wherein I imagined I might encount er some adventures similar to 
those related by the Abbé Prévost in the first volume of his anecdotes. 
And indeed I did …but how different were the adventures I 
encountered !… 
Accordingly, I repaired to Uppsala, a city situated on the Fyris River, 
which divid es that town in two. Long the capital of Sweden, Uppsala is 
still today, after Stockholm, the second most important city of that 
country. After spending three weeks there, I continued on to Falun, the 
ancient cradle of the Scythians, the customs and dress of which the 
present -day inhabitants of Dalecarlia still retain. As I reached the 
outskirts of Falun, I came to the Taperg mine, one of the most imposing 
in all Sweden.  
These mines, long the most precious natural resource of the State, 
ultimately fell bene ath the yoke of the English, because of debts 
contracted by the mine owners with the English, a nation which stands 
forever ready to serve those whom she fancies she may one day be in a position to dominate and engulf, after having upset their balance of t rade 
or having whittled away their strength by dint of usurious loans.  
Once at Taperg, my imagination was filled with these thoughts just 
prior to my descent into these subterranean depths, wherein the luxury 
and the avarice of a handful of men was capable  of dominating so many 
others.  
Only recently returned from Italy, I was under the impression that 
these quarries doubtless resembled the Catacombs of Rome or Naples. I 
was mistaken. Though situated far deeper in the bowels of the earth, I 
was to discover t here a solitude less terrifying.  
At Uppsala I had been provided with a highly cultivated man to act as 
my guide, a man well versed in letters and with a knowledge both profound and broad. Fortunately for me, Falkeneim  (for that was his 
name) spoke impeccab le German and English, the only languages in 
common use in the North, through which I was able to communicate with him. We found that we both preferred the former language, and settled upon it; conversation on all subjects was thus no problem for us, 
and ’twas easy for me to learn from his lips the tale that I shall shortly 
relate.  
With the aid of a basket and a pulley and rope —an apparatus so 
designed that the descent could be made without the slightest danger —
we reached the bottom of that mine, and in the  twinkling of an eye 
found ourselves some hundred and twenty fathoms beneath the surface of the earth. ’Twas  with considerable amazement that I saw in these 
depths a veritable subterranean city: streets, houses, churches, inns, 
much hustle and bustle, work  being performed, police, judges: in short, 
everything the most civilized city of Europe might offer.  After having surveyed these singular dwellings, we went into a tavern, 
where Falkeneim was able to order from the innkeeper all that we 
needed to quench our thirst and satisfy our hunger: a beer of excellent 
quality, dried fish, and a kind of Swedish bread commonly used in rural areas made of the bark of pine and birch trees, mixed with straw, some 
wild roots, and kneaded together with oatmeal. Does one nee d any more 
to satisfy one’s veritable needs? The philosopher who travels the ways 
and byways of the world in search of knowledge must learn to adapt 
himself to every time and clime, to every custom and religion, to all 
kinds of lodging and food, and leave to the indolent voluptuary of the capital his prejudices …his luxury …that shameless luxury which, never 
satisfied by real needs, daily creates factitious ones, to the detriment of one’s health and fortune.  
We were just finishing our frugal meal when one of the mine workers, 
dressed in a blue jacket and breeches, his head covered with an inadequate and ill -fitting blond wig, came over and greeted Falkeneim in 
Swedish. Out of deference to me, my guide having answered him in 
German, the prisoner (for such he wa s) forthwith began to converse in 
that language. This poor wretch, seeing that I was the sole reason for 
their conversing in German, and thinking to discern my nationality, paid 
me a compliment in French, which he spoke to perfection, then turned 
back to Falkeneim and asked him if he had any news from Stockholm. 
He spoke of the King, mentioned several persons of the Court, and did 
so with an ease and assurance that caused me to study him more 
attentively. He asked Falkeneim whether he deemed it possible that he 
might one day be pardoned, to which my guide replied negatively, 
shaking his head with a show of regret.  The prisoner immediately departed, his eyes filled with chagrin, after 
having refused to share our food or drink, despite our insistence. A 
moment later he returned and asked Falkeneim whether he might 
entrust him with a letter that he would hasten to write. My companion 
promised to do whatever the prisoner desired, and the latter withdrew a 
second time.  
As soon as he was outside:  
“Who is that man?”  I asked Falkeneim.  
“One of the foremost noblemen of all Sweden,” he replied.  
“Your words amaze me!”  
“He is fortunate indeed to be here. Our sovereign’s leniency in his 
behalf might be likened to the generosity of Augustus with what regards 
Cinna. That man  you just saw is Count Oxtiern, one of the Senators 
most ardently against the King during the Revolution of 1772.2 After 
peace had been restored, he was further guilty of unparalleled crimes. After he had been tried and found guilty by the laws of the land , the 
King, remembering the hate that Oxtiern had evinced against him, 
summoned him and said: ‘Count Oxtiern, the judges have decreed your 
death …’twas  not so many years ago you decreed my banishment from 
the land; ’tis  for this reason I intend to spare your life: I wish to show 
you that the heart of him whom you deemed unworthy of the throne was 
none the less not utterly without virtue.’ Oxtiern fell at Gustavus’ feet, a 
torrent of tears issuing from his eyes. ‘I should have preferred to pardon 
you complete ly,’ said the King, helping Oxtiern to his feet, ‘but the 
enormity of your acts made this impossible. I am sending you to the 
2 It is worthwhile recalling that in this Revolution the King had cast his lot with the 
popular party, and that the Senators were against the King and the people.                                           mines. I do not claim you will be happy there, but at least you will be 
alive. You may go.’ Thus Oxtiern was brought to this place ; ’tis he you 
have just seen. Come now, let us be going,” added Falkeneim, “ ’tis  
growing late. We shall fetch his letter on our way out.”  
“Oh, Monsieur,” I then said to my guide, “were it necessary to spend a 
full week here, you have piqued my curiosity uncommonly; I refuse to leave these entrails of the earth so long as you have not revealed to me the reasons which have brought this poor wretch hither. Though a 
criminal, he has a most interesting face; why, the man is not a day over 
forty! I should like t o see him set free. He might turn over a new leaf, 
and lead an honest life.”  
“Oxtiern, honest? Never …never …” 
“For pity’s sake, Monsieur, satisfy my curiosity!”  
“All right, I shall,” Falkeneim replied. “Besides, that will give him 
time to write his letters.  I shall send word to him that he need not 
hasten. Come, let us repair to this back room, where we will be less disturbed than here next to the street …. Still, I am most reluctant to 
discover these things to you, ’twill  erase from your heart any feeling of  
pity the villain may have aroused in you. I should prefer that you remain 
in ignorance, and that he thus lose none of your good will toward him.”  
“Monsieur,” I said to Falkeneim, “the failings of man teach me to 
know him better; my sole purpose in traveling is to study. The further he has deviated from the barriers which Nature or man -made laws have 
imposed upon him, the more interesting is he as a subject of study, the more worthy to be examined and the more deserving of my compassion. 
Virtue needs naught  but worship, its career is one of happiness …it could 
not be otherwise, a thousand arms open to receive its disciples if ever 
adversity overtakes them. But no one opens his arms to the guilty person …. People blush to be in his presence, are embarrassed to offer 
him their tears, as though terrified of contagion; he is banished from 
every heart: pride impels us to heap abuse upon him whom we ought to 
succor out of a feeling of humanity. Therefore, Monsieur, when can we find a mortal more interesting than he who, from the pinnacle of fame 
and fortune, has suddenly fallen into the pit of misfortune, who, born to 
greatness, experiences naught but the pangs of disappointment, of disgrace …who is henceforth surrounded by naught save the calamities of 
poverty, and wh ose heart is filled with the shafts of remorse or the 
serpents of despair? Such a man, my dear friend, is full worthy of my pity. I shall not add my voice to those fools who say: ‘He has no one to 
blame but himself,’ nor shall I join the chorus of hardhear ted souls who, 
to justify their induration, cry out: ‘Why, the man is all too guilty.’ Eh! 
What does it matter to me what bounds he has exceeded, what rules or 
laws he has scorned, what he has done! He is a man, and therefore 
weak …he is a criminal, he is m iserable, he has my pity…. Speak up, 
Falkeneim, pray do, I am burning to hear what you have to tell.”  
And my worthy friend related to me the following tale in these terms:  
In the early years of the present century, a German nobleman, Roman 
Catholic by reli gion, was obliged to flee his own country over a matter 
which is far from being a discredit to him. Knowing that, although we have abjured our papistic errors, the Roman religion was none the less tolerated in our provinces, he came to Stockholm. A young a nd 
handsome man, with a strong bent for the military and eager for a taste 
of glory, he caught the fancy of Charles XII and had the honor of 
accompanying him on several of his expeditions. He took part in the 
unfortunate battle of Poltava, remained with th e King in his refuge at 
Bendery, shared his imprisonment in the Turkish dungeons, and returned with him to Sweden. When in 1718 our country lost this hero 
beneath the walls of Fredrikshald, in Norway, Sanders ( ’tis the name of 
the man of whom I am speaking ) had by this time attained the rank of 
colonel in our armies, and ’twas  in this capacity he retired from service 
and went to live in Norrköping, a commercial city fifteen leagues from 
Stockholm, situated on the canal which, in the province of Ostergötland , 
joins Lake Vättern to the Baltic Sea. There Sanders married and had a 
son, whom the later Kings Frederick I and Adolphus -Frederick accepted 
into their service as his father had been accepted before him. Through his own merit, the young man advanced in th e King’s service until, like 
his father, he attained the rank of colonel. Although still a young man, 
he retired to Norrköping, his birthplace, and there he married the 
daughter of a rather impecunious merchant. This worthy lady died twelve years later, af ter having given birth to a daughter, Ernestine, who 
is the subject of the present tale.  
The story opens three years ago, at which time Sanders must have 
been about forty -two. His daughter was then sixteen, and was very 
rightly judged to be one of the most  beautiful creatures ever to grace our 
fair land. She was tall, a perfect model for an artist’s brush; noble and 
proud in bearing, she had black eyes as beautiful as they were lively, 
extremely long hair of the same color, which as you know is exceedingly 
rare in our part of the world. In spite of her dark hair and eyes, she had the most beautiful, the most alabaster skin. People found that she 
somewhat resembled our beautiful Countess de Sparre, the illustrious 
friend of our learned Christina, and ’tis  indeed true.  
Young Mademoiselle Sanders had not reached the age of sixteen 
without her heart already having made a choice. Having often heard her mother complain how cruel it was for a young wife who adored her husband to be constantly separated from him by t he duties of a State to 
which he owes total allegiance and which detains him now in one city, 
now in another, Ernestine, with her father’s approval, had decided to 
marry a young man, Herman by name, who was of the same religion as she and who intended to e nter the world of commerce. Herman’s 
training for that profession was presently taking place in the offices of M. Scholtz, the most famous merchant in Norrköping and one of the richest in all Sweden.  
Herman was the scion of a merchant family. But he had lo st his 
parents while he was still very young, and his father, upon his deathbed, had commended him to his former associate Scholtz. Thus he shared 
their dwelling, and having been found deserving of their full confidence 
by his seriousness of purpose and his diligence, Herman had been placed in charge of the business’ funds and books, although he was not yet 
twenty -two. ’Twas  at this juncture that the head of the business died, 
leaving no heirs. Herman henceforth found himself dependent upon 
Scholtz’s widow,  an arrogant and haughty woman who, in spite of all her 
husband’s instructions, seemed firmly resolved to get rid of the young 
man if he did not straightway accept the plans she had in mind for him.  
Herman was a perfect match for Ernestine, as handsome as she was 
beautiful, adoring her as much as she loved him; there was also little 
doubt that the widow Scholtz was not blind to his qualities and that she, still attractive at forty, was enamored of him. But Herman, whose heart 
was taken, made not the slighte st move to respond to his patroness’ 
prepossession, and although he strongly suspected her feelings toward 
him, he wisely feigned to be unaware of them.  
Ernestine Sanders, however, was alarmed by Madame Scholtz’s 
passion; she knew her to be a bold and ente rprising woman, jealous and hot-tempered; a rival such as she worried her prodigiously. Furthermore, 
she herself was far from being as good a match for Herman as was 
Madame Scholtz: her father had no dowry to offer her, and although her 
mother had left her  a modest inheritance, how could she pretend to 
compete with the impressive fortune that Madame Scholtz could offer 
her young treasurer?  
Colonel Sanders approved of his daughter’s choice; as she was his only 
child, he adored her, and he knew that Herman po ssessed some wealth, 
that he was intelligent, was a young man of high principles, and that, 
furthermore, he had won Ernestine’s heart; thus he had no intention of raising the least objection to so suitable a match. But fate does not 
always will what is bes t. It seems, in fact, to take pleasure in unsettling 
the best -laid plans of men, in order that from these inconstancies they 
may derive lessons and so learn never to count upon anything in this 
world, whose most certain laws are instability and disorder.  
“Herman,” the widow said one day to Ernestine’s lover,
3 “by now you 
have had sufficient training in the world of commerce to make a decision 
concerning your future. The money your parents left you has, thanks to 
my husband and me, increased in value more th an enough to allow you 
to live comfortably. Set up your own establishment, my friend, I soon 
plan to retire. We can reconcile our accounts at the first possible 
occasion.”  
“Whatever you wish, Madame,” said Herman. “You are aware of my 
honesty and disintere st. I am as little concerned about my money which 
3 Though Sade uses the terms amant  and amante  in referring to Herman and 
Ernestine,  it is obvious their relationship is platonic and pristine. In translating, we 
have none the less used both “lover” and “paramour”; they should, however, be 
understood as Sade intended them. —Tr .                                          is in your hands as you must be about your money which I control in 
managing your affairs.”  
“But Herman, have you no plans to establish your own business?”  
“I am still young, Madame.”  
“All the more reason f or some sensible and impressionable young 
woman to judge you an attractive match. I am certain you must already have someone in mind whom you assuredly would make happy.”  
“I wish to have a greater fortune before I reach such a stage.”  
“A woman would help y ou to amass it.”  
“When I marry, I want my fortune already made, so that I can devote 
my full attention to my wife and children.”  
“You mean to say there is no woman in the world who has caught 
your fancy?”  
“There is one whom I revere as I would my own mothe r, to whom my 
services are dedicated as long as she vouchsafes to accept them.”  
“’Tis not to these sentiments I am referring, my friend. I am grateful 
for them, but ’tis  not upon such that a marriage is founded. Herman, I 
wish to know whether you have found anyone with whom you would 
like to share your life?”  
“No, Madame.”  
“In that case why do you spend all your time at the Sanders’? What 
keeps constantly enticing you back to that man’s house? He is a military 
man, you are a merchant. You should spend more time frequenting 
persons of your own profession, my friend, and forget those who are 
not.”  
“Madame knows that I am Catholic. The Colonel is too. Thus we 
often meet to pray together …to visit together those chapels which are 
open to us.”  “I have never held your religion against you, although I do not share 
your belief, and indeed am perfectly convinced of the uselessness of all 
that nonsense, of whatever persuasion. You must confess, Herman, that 
I have never interfered with you on that score.”  
“Well, Madame,  that is why —for religion—that I sometimes call 
upon the Colonel.”  
“Herman, there is another reason for these frequent visits, something 
you are hiding from me: you love Ernestine, that mere wisp of a child 
who, to my mind, has neither wit nor beauty but who, to hear the 
townsfolk talk, is one of the wonders of all Sweden…. Yes, Herman, you love her…you love her, I say, and I know it.”  
“Mademoiselle Ernestine Sanders thinks well of me, I believe, 
Madame. But her birth …her station …Were you aware, Madame, that 
her grandfather, Colonel Sanders, was a close friend of Charles XII, and 
originally a high -ranking nobleman from Westphalia?”  
“I was.”  
“Well, then, Madame, would she make a suitable match for me?”  
“I assure you most emphatically, Herman, that I think she  would not. 
What you need is a mature woman, one who would attend to your 
fortune and give it her constant attention; a woman, in one word, of my 
age and position.”  
Herman blushed and turned away …. As at that point tea was served, 
the conversation was inte rrupted, and Herman, after luncheon was over, 
returned to his occupations.  
“Oh! my dear Ernestine,” said Herman the following day to Sanders’ 
daughter, “ ’tis  all too true that that cruel woman has designs upon me, 
of that there can no longer be any doubt.  You are aware of her temper, her moods, her jealousy, and her influence in the town.4 Ernestine, I fear 
the worst.”  
And as the Colonel entered at this point, they informed him of their 
apprehensions.  
Sanders was a former soldier, a man of exceeding good s ense who 
preferred not to create any trouble for himself in the town, and clearly 
perceiving that the protection he was granting Herman was going to draw down upon him the wrath both of Madame Scholtz and of all her 
friends, he thought it best to advise th e youths to surrender to 
circumstance. He attempted to make Herman see that the widow upon 
whom he was dependent would, in fact, make a far better match for him 
than Ernestine, and that, at his age, he should value far more a fat purse 
than a pretty face.  
“’Tis not that I refuse you my daughter’s hand, my boy,” quoth the 
Colonel. “I know you and I esteem you. You have won the heart of her 
whom you adore, and I have no desire to create any obstacles to your 
happiness; but I am as much loath to prepare someth ing you may live to 
regret. You are both young; at your age you are blind to all save love, you fancy that love is all you need to live. You are mistaken; without wealth love wilts and withers away, and the choice one makes when prompted 
by love alone is o ft a poor one, which is soon followed by remorse.”  
“Father,” said Ernestine, casting herself at Sanders’ feet, “respected 
author of my days, I beseech you not to deprive me of the hope that my beloved Herman will one day be mine. Since I was a child you have 
4 Norrköping is a wholly commercial city. Consequently, a woman such as Madame 
Scholtz, in a town of this kind, would, as the head of one of the most prosperous 
businesses in Sweden, wield considerable influence.                                           promised me his hand. That thought is my only source of joy and 
pleasure; to deprive me of it will surely send me to my grave. My heart 
has been captured by him, secure in the knowledge that you approved of 
my sentiments. In Herman’s love for me he will  find all the necessary 
courage to resist the blandishments of Madame Scholtz …. O Father! do 
not abandon us!”  
“Get up, my child,” the Colonel said. “I love you …I adore you …since 
you can only be happy with Herman, and since you both love one 
another, set yo ur minds at rest, you will never have any save Herman for 
husband… . And in fact, he owes that woman nothing. His honesty …his 
zeal, have more than repaid the gratitude he owes her; he is under no 
obligation to sacrifice his life in order to please her …. But  we must 
manage things so that there is no falling out with anyone ….” 
“Monsieur,” said Herman, clasping the Colonel in his arms, “you who 
have granted me the right to call you Father, how can I ever repay you 
for the promises which you have just made me fr om the depths of your 
heart? Yes, I shall be worthy of the gift you are giving me. My every 
thought and act will be but for you and your beloved daughter …. I shall 
be the pillar and the companion of your declining years …. Father, fear 
not…we shall not make  any enemies for ourselves, there is no 
contractual agreement between Madame Scholtz and me. When I 
present her with a proper accounting of her funds, and reclaim from her merely what she owes me, what can she say?”  
“Ah! my boy, you do not know the hearts of those you intend to 
confront,” the Colonel resumed, prey to a kind of concern he was unable 
to master. “There is no crime on the face of the earth to which a wicked 
woman will not stoop when ’tis  a question of revenging herself for the 
charms a lover has spurned. That wretched woman will cause the poisonous effects of her wrath to rain down upon us all, and ’twill  not be 
the roses of happiness you will reap, but the dark cypresses of 
mourning.”  
Ernestine and the man she loved spent the rest of the day calming her 
father’s fears, allaying his apprehensions, and assuring him of their future 
happiness, which they painted for him in gentle hues. Nothing is as 
persuasive as the eloquence of lovers; theirs is a logic of the heart that the mind’s logic can never  equal.  
Herman dined with his tender friends and left them at an early hour, 
his soul full to overflowing with hope and joy.  
Approximately three months passed in this manner, without the 
widow ever raising the subject again, and without Herman daring to ta ke 
the initiative and propose a settlement and separation. The Colonel gave the young man to understand that there was nothing disadvantageous in 
these delays. Ernestine was young, and her father did not in the least 
object to adding to the modest dowry wh ich was already hers, in the 
form of a certain inheritance she could expect to receive from the widow 
Plorman, her aunt, a native of Stockholm who, already well along in 
years, might reasonably be expected to die at any moment.  
But Madame Scholtz was impat ient, and too clever not to detect her 
young bookkeeper’s embarrassment; ’twas  she who first broached the 
subject again and asked him whether he had reflected upon what they 
had discussed the last time they had had an opportunity to talk.  
“Yes,” replied Ernestine’s lover, “and if ’tis  a rendering of accounts and 
a separation that Madame is referring to, I am at her service.”  
“It seems to me, Herman, that was not precisely the topic we 
discussed.”  
“What was it then, Madame?”  “I asked you whether you wished t o establish a business of your own, 
and whether you had chosen a wife who might help you run it.”  
“I thought I had replied that I preferred to wait till I had amassed a 
greater fortune before marrying.”  
“’Twas  what you said, Herman, but I must confess I did not believe 
you. And as we talk now, every expression on your face reveals the deceit 
in your soul.”  
“Ah! never has deceit besoiled my heart, Madame, and you know it 
well. Since childhood I have been close to you; you have vouchsafed to replace the mothe r I had the misfortune to lose. Have no fear that my 
gratitude may ever lessen or vanish.”  
“You speak constantly of gratitude, Herman. I should have preferred 
from you a sentiment more tender.”  
“But, Madame, can I control my …” 
“Traitor! Is this your reward  for all my loving care? Your ingratitude is 
most enlightening, that I can see …. I have been devoting myself to a 
monster …. Since I have become a widow, Herman, ’tis  to your hand and 
heart I aspired, I can no longer conceal it …. The manner wherein I 
manage d your affairs, the way I made your money grow and 
prosper …my conduct regarding you…even my eyes, which doubtless 
betrayed me …all this, false -hearted creature, all this, could not have 
failed to persuade you of my passion…and is this my reward? I am to be 
paid back with indifference and contempt? Herman, you do not know 
the heart of the woman you are insulting. No, you have no idea of the 
things whereof she is capable …you will learn only after it is too late …. 
Now, leave me, yes, leave me forthwith and prep are your books, 
Herman. I intend to do the same, and we shall go our separate ways. Yes, we shall separate. You will have no difficulty finding a roof for 
yourself; Sanders’ house is doubtless open and waiting.”  
Madame Scholtz’s state was such that our you ng lover had no 
difficulty perceiving that it was essential that he conceal his true feelings in order not to bring down upon the Colonel the full force of this 
dangerous creature’s wrath and desire for vengeance. Herman therefore 
followed the dictum that a soft answer turneth away wrath, told his protectress that she was quite mistaken in her assumptions, and 
reminded her that the fact that he did not wish to marry until he had 
measurably increased his fortune surely belied her contention he had plans to m arry the Colonel’s daughter.  
“My friend,” Madame Scholtz replied to that, “I know your heart as 
though ’twere  my own. I know that ’tis  impossible you could have grown 
so distant were your heart not aflame for someone else. Although I may 
not be in the firs t flush of youth, do you think that I am still not 
attractive enough to find another husband? Yes, Herman, ’tis  clear 
indeed: you would love me were it not for that creature whom I loathe, and upon whom I shall revenge myself for your indifference.”  
At the se words Herman shuddered. Colonel Sanders, not wholly at 
home in his new land, and retired from service, was far from enjoying the powerful influence in Norrköping which Madame Scholtz could 
command. Her influence was as far -reaching as it was overwhelming, 
whereas the Colonel had virtually dropped out of the public eye and lost 
contact with those personages who, in Sweden as elsewhere in the world, 
hold in esteem only those who impress them by their favor or wealth; the 
Colonel, I say, was no longer considered as more than an ordinary 
individual whom influence and gold could easily crush, and Madame Scholtz, as with all scurvy souls, was not long in perceiving the truth of 
this situation.  
Herman, therefore, made the decision to declare himself much more 
openly, albeit hypocritically, than he ever had done before. He cast 
himself at the knees of Madame Scholtz, besought her to calm her fears, 
reassured her that his heart contained no sentiment which could in any 
wise prove harmful to her from whom he had rec eived so many 
blessings, and he begged her not to consider any further for the moment 
the idea of the separation with which she had threatened him. Realizing 
full well the young man’s state of mind at that time, Madame Scholtz decided that this was the mos t she could expect; she placed all her hopes 
in a combination of her own charms and the beneficent effects of time, and quickly regained her composure.  
Herman did not fail to inform the Colonel of this most recent 
conversation, and this wise and worthy man, still fearful of the possible vexations and dangerous character of Madame Scholtz, again tried to persuade the young man that he would be better off yielding to the 
designs of his patroness than persisting in his desire to marry Ernestine. 
But both lover s mustered every argument at their command to remind 
the Colonel of the promises he had made them and to make him pledge 
that he would never forswear them.  
Things had been in this pass for about six months when Count 
Oxtiern, this villain whom you saw in irons a short while ago in these mines —irons to which he has been confined for more than a year and to 
which he is condemned to spend the rest of his days —Count Oxtiern, I 
say, was obliged to come from Stockholm to pay a visit to Norrköping. The object of h is visit was to withdraw certain funds invested with 
Madame Scholtz by his father, whose fortune the Count had just inherited. Madame Scholtz, full aware of her visitor’s importance —he 
was the son of a Senator and a Senator himself—had prepared her best 
chambers for him, and prepared to receive him with the full luxury that 
her wealth permitted.  
The Count arrived, and the day following his arrival his elegant 
hostess gave him a sumptuous dinner, followed by a ball, to which all the most beautiful women in t own were invited. Ernestine was not 
forgotten, and ’twas  not without some trepidation that Herman saw she 
was resolved to go. Were it possible for the Count to see someone as beautiful as she without paying her the respects which were due her? What did Her man not have to fear from such a rival: assuming the worst 
came to pass, would Ernestine have the strength or force of character to refuse the proffered hand of one of the mightiest lords of Sweden? And were she to refuse, would there not be formed against  both Herman and 
Ernestine a league whose chief conspirators would be the powerful Oxtiern and Madame Scholtz? And what misfortunes might then be Herman’s? Could he, with his limited and straitened circumstances, 
resist the arms of so many enemies conspiring against him?  
He informed Ernestine of his apprehensions, and this worthy, 
sensitive, and delicate girl, fully prepared to sacrifice such frivolous pleasures for the sentiments which burned within her, proposed that 
Herman immediately tell Madame Scholtz  that he was refusing her 
offer. Herman himself was rather of the same opinion. But since, in this 
small circle of worthy souls, no decisions were made without the prior 
consent of Sanders, they sought his advice, and found that he was far 
from sharing the ir opinion. He maintained that to refuse Madame 
Scholtz’s invitation would inevitably result in a rupture with her, that 
that clever woman would be quick to divine the reasons for their refusal, and in a situation where it was above all essential not to offend her, their 
proposed course of action was bound to upset her.  
At this point Ernestine dared to ask the object of her affections what 
precisely it was he feared, nor did she conceal from him the sorrow that his suspicions caused her.  
“Oh, my dear friend!” said that interesting girl, clasping Herman’s 
hands in her own, “were the most powerful personages of all Europe present at this soiree, were they all to fall in love with your dear 
Ernestine, could you for one moment doubt that all their collective 
flatteries could be aught but a further homage to him who has won her 
heart? Ah! fear not, Herman, she whom you have captivated could never 
lose her heart to another. Were I obliged to live with you in a state of 
slavery, I should prefer it to living with ano ther upon the throne itself; 
can any boon the earth has to offer hold any meaning for me in the arms 
of another besides her beloved! …Herman, give yourself due credit: can 
you for one moment fancy that my eye may perceive any mortal at this 
ball who is your  equal? Let my heart be the sole judge of your worth, my 
friend, and you will be the most amiable of creatures, as you are the most 
beloved.”  
Herman covered his mistress’ hands with a thousand kisses, he 
desisted from giving any further evidence of his fea rs, but they none the 
less remained anchored in his heart. There dwells in the heart of a man 
in love certain presentiments which are rarely mistaken. Herman felt 
them, he repressed them, and the beautiful Ernestine appeared at 
Madame Scholtz’s party like a rose in the midst of lesser flowers. She 
was attired in the garb of ancient Sweden, in the style of the ancient 
Scythians, her features noble and proud, singularly heightened by that 
adornment, her figure delicate and supple, infinitely better outlined beneath this free- falling, unpleated gown which only suggested her 
gentle forms, her lovely hair cascading down in waves over the quiver 
slung across her back, and with the bow held in her hand… all this made 
her look like Love itself disguised beneath the f eatures of fair Bellona. It 
was as though each of the arrows she carried with so much grace was 
destined, each time it touched the heart of someone present, to enchain 
it forthwith to that celestial beauty.  
If Herman did not see Ernestine enter the room without a feeling of 
trepidation, Oxtiern, for his part, experienced an emotion so keen that for several minutes he found it impossible to utter a word. You have seen Oxtiern; he is a rather handsome fellow; but what a soul Nature has 
enclosed within that de ceptive exterior! The Count was immensely 
wealthy and, only recently come into possession of his full fortune, never 
dreamt for a moment there could be any restraints imposed upon his 
impassioned desires; whatever reason and circumstance raised as 
obstacle s in his path served only to whet the appetite of his impetuosity. 
As unprincipled as he was lacking in virtue, still steeped in the prejudices 
of a corps whose pride had led it to revolt against the King himself, 
Oxtiern fancied that there was nothing in the world which could act as a 
bridle to his passions. Now, of all the passions wherewith his ardent soul 
was inflamed, love was the most impetuous; but this sentiment, which in 
a noble soul may approximate a virtue, is bound to become the source of many a crime in a heart as corrupt as Oxtiern’s.  
No sooner had that dangerous man laid eyes upon our beautiful 
heroine than he straightway conceived the idea of seducing her. He 
danced with her a number of times, arranged to be seated next to her at 
dinner, and in short so clearly demonstrated the sentiments she inspired in him that in a trice the whole town was persuaded that she would soon 
become either Oxtiern’s wife or his mistress.  
’Tis impossible to depict the cruel state of mind which was Herman’s 
while all this was taking place. He had gone to the ball, but seeing his beloved the center of such ardent attention, were it even conceivable for 
a moment that he approach her? Ernestine’s sentiments for Herman had 
most assuredly not changed one whit; but is’t possible for a young girl to protect herself against the sin of pride? Is’t possible for her not to lose 
her head, were it even for a moment, when such public homage is paid 
to her? And that vanity wherewith she is flattered and which people play upon—by dem onstrating to her that she can be beloved of all —does it 
not lessen within her the desire she previously felt to be responsive solely to the attentions of a single soul? Ernestine noticed that Herman was concerned; but Oxtiern was full of flattering attent ions, the entire 
gathering had naught but the highest praise for her, and Ernestine, ensnared by pride, did not feel, as she should have, the sorrow she was causing her poor lover.  
The Colonel was also the recipient of many marks of esteem on the 
part of Count Oxtiern, who singled him out especially in the course of 
his conversations. He offered to help the Colonel in any way he could in 
Stockholm and assured him that, still far too young to be retired, he 
should join some army corps and continue his ascent  through the ranks 
until he had reached the high pinnacles to which his birth and talents 
had destined him. The Count added that he would help him in that 
matter as in whatsoever else he might desire at the Court, and begged 
him to take advantage of the of fer, saying that he would consider as so 
many personal pleasures each of the services such a worthy gentleman would enable him to render. The ball ended at dawn, and the guests 
departed.  
At the first opportunity the following day, Senator Oxtiern asked 
Madame Scholtz to give him further details concerning the young Scythian of the night before, whose ravishing image had remained fixed 
in his mind since he had first set eyes upon her.  
“She is the most beautiful girl in all Norrköping,” the merchant said, 
delighted to see that the Count, by thwarting Herman’s love, might 
render her his heart. “In truth, Senator, there’s not a girl in the length 
and breadth of the country who can compare with our Ernestine.”  
“Of the country!” cried the Count, “in all of Europe,  Madame …. And 
what does she do …what thoughts fill her mind? …Who is in love with 
her…who adores this heavenly creature? Who is the man who would 
dare to vie with me for the possession of her charms?”  
“I shall spare you a recital of her birth and background:  you know that 
she is the daughter of Colonel Sanders, a worthy man, a man of quality and high birth. But what you are unaware of perhaps —and the news will 
grieve you, from what you say about your sentiments toward her —is that 
she is on the eve of marrying  a young bookkeeper who works for me, 
with whom she is madly in love and who loves her at least as much.”  
“A match such as this for Ernestine!” cried the Senator …. “This 
angel, the wife of a bookkeeper! …’Tis  out of the question, Madame, the 
match must not take place; you and I must join forces to make certain it 
never does. ’Twould  be utterly ridiculous; Ernestine was born to grace 
the Court with her brilliance, and I wish to present her there under my 
name.”  
“But with no fortune, Count …the daughter of an i mpoverished 
nobleman …of a soldier of fortune.”  “She is the daughter of the gods themselves,” said Oxtiern, beside 
himself, “she must dwell in their abode.”  
“Ah! Senator, you will drive the young man I mentioned to despair. 
Rare is a love as pure and strong  as his …rare the sentiments as sincere as 
his for Ernestine.”  
“What disturbs me least in the world, Madame, is a rival of this kind. 
Should I, should my love, be alarmed by this inferior breed of men? I 
count upon your helping me discover the means whereby  we get rid of 
him…send him away. And if he refuses to go of his own free 
will…Leave it to me, Madame Scholtz, leave it to me, we shall rid 
ourselves of this scurvy fellow.”  
Madame Scholtz was inwardly delighted, and far from trying to 
discourage the Count , she offered him only that kind of argument which 
is easily overcome and which, when vanquished, serves but to incite love.  
But while all this was taking place at Madame Scholtz’s, Herman was 
at the feet of his beloved Ernestine.  
“See now! Was it not exac tly as I said, Ernestine?” he cried, tears 
streaming down his face, “did I not foresee that this accursed ball would 
cause us untold sorrow? Each compliment he paid you, each word of 
praise he offered you was another dagger thrust into my wounded heart. 
Do you still doubt that he adores you? Has he already declared his love 
to you?”  
“What do I care, unjust man,” Ernestine replied, doing her best to 
calm the sole object of her affections, “what do I care about the fulsome 
praise this man enjoys showering upon me, so long as my heart belongs 
to you alone? Did you believe I was flattered by the attention he paid 
me?”  “Yes, Ernestine, I did believe you were, and was not mistaken. Your 
eyes shone with pride at the knowledge you pleased him, all you did or 
said wa s intended for him alone.”  
“I resent these reproaches, Herman; coming from you they grieve me 
sorely. I thought you discerning enough, and possessed of sufficient tact, 
not to yield so easily to your fears. Very well, confess your concern to my 
father, and  let us celebrate our marriage tomorrow, I have no objection.”  
Herman wasted no time taking advantage of her suggestion. He went 
straightway to Colonel Sanders, together with Ernestine, and throwing himself in the Colonel’s arms, made him swear upon everyt hing he held 
holy that Sanders would raise no further objections to the consummation 
of their happiness.  
But pride had already wormed its way much further into Sanders’ 
heart than into his daughter’s, and in his there were fewer sentiments to 
counterbalanc e its effects. The Colonel, a man of honor and candor, was 
not in the least inclined to fail to keep the commitments he had made to 
Herman, but the thought of Oxtiern’s protection dazzled him. He had 
been quick to remark upon his daughter’s triumph over th e Senator’s 
heart. His friends had insinuated to him that, if that passion resulted in 
the legitimate consequences he had every right to expect it would, his 
fortune would inevitably be made. These thoughts had preoccupied him 
throughout the night; in his mind he had made plans, had indulged in 
fantasies wherein his ambitions were realized. The timing was, in one 
word, bad; in fact, Herman could not have chosen a worse moment. 
None the less, Sanders was careful not to refuse the young man’s request; 
such co nduct was alien to his nature. Moreover, might he not have built 
all his dreams upon a foundation of sand? What guarantee did he have 
of the reality of the fantasies wherewith he had been toying? Thus he fell back upon the selfsame reasons he had been in t he habit of employing in 
the past: his daughter’s youth; the inheritance expected from her Aunt 
Plorman; the fear of provoking, against both Ernestine and himself, the 
full fury of Madame Scholtz who, now supported by the Senator, was all the more to be fe ared. Moreover, would it be wisest to choose the very 
moment when the Count was in town? It seemed pointless to make a spectacle of oneself, and if Madame Scholtz were truly going to be upset by this match, the very moment when she found herself buttressed by 
the Count’s favor and influence would surely be the moment when she risked to be most dangerous. Ernestine was more insistent than ever; her conscience was slightly guilty because of her conduct the evening before, 
and she was most anxious to prove to her friend that a chilling of her 
sentiments toward him could not be counted among her wrongs. The Colonel, uncertain as to the better course of action, and little 
accustomed to resisting his daughter’s entreaties, asked merely that she 
await the Senator’s  departure, promising that he would then be the first 
to eliminate any remaining obstacles, even to the extent of going to see 
Madame Scholtz, if that became necessary, in order to calm her wrath, 
or to get her agreement to audit the accounts, for without a rendering of 
their accounts Herman could not properly effect a separation from his 
patroness.  
Herman left without feeling fully satisfied. He none the less felt 
reassured concerning his mistress’ sentiments, but he was consumed by a dark feeling of despa ir which he could not manage to dispel.  
No sooner had he left the Sanderses’ house than the Senator 
appeared. He had been brought hither by Madame Scholtz and had come, he declared, in order to pay his respects to the worthy soldier 
whom it had been his gr eat privilege to encounter in the course of his visit, and at the same time requested permission to pay his respects as 
well to the charming Ernestine.  
The Colonel and his daughter received these compliments with the 
becoming modesty expected of them. Mada me Scholtz, concealing her 
rage and jealousy because she began to perceive a whole host of possible 
means whereby she might implement the cruel designs concealed in her 
heart, showered fulsome praise upon the Colonel and endless compliments upon Ernestine,  and the conversation was thus as pleasant 
as it could be under the circumstances.  
Several days passed in this manner, during which Sanders and his 
daughter, and the Count and Madame Scholtz, paid each other visits, 
dined together now at one house, now at another, all of which occurred 
without Herman’s ever participating in any of these pleasure -parties.  
During this period of several days, Oxtiern lost no opportunity to 
speak of his love, and it became impossible for Mademoiselle Sanders any longer to doubt  that the Count was consumed with the most ardent 
passion for her; but Ernestine’s heart had protected her, and her 
boundless love for Herman prevented her from falling into the trap of 
pride a second time; she dismissed everything, demurred to everything,  
appeared restrained and dreamy at all the festive occasions to which she 
was invited, and she never came away from any without begging her 
father not to take her to any others. It was too late: Sanders, who as I have said did not have the same reasons to resist the bait tendered by 
Oxtiern, was an easy prey. There had been a number of secret conversations among Madame Scholtz, the Senator, and the Colonel, 
which had succeeded finally in dazzling poor Sanders, and the artful 
Oxtiern, without ever compromising himself overmuch, without ever 
once revealing his hand, simply persuading the Colonel that sooner or later ’twas  the inevitable course of fate that things would work out the 
way he predicted, Oxtiern, I say, had so beguiled Sanders that not only 
had he extracted from him the promise not to honor his commitments to 
Herman, but also had convinced him to forsake his solitary existence in Norrköping and come to Stockholm, in order to take advantage of the 
influence he promised to exert in his behalf and the favors wherewith it 
was his intention to shower him.  
Ernestine, who in the course of all this activity had less of an 
opportunity to see her lover, none the less continued to write him, but as she knew he was full capable of an outburst of temper and wishe d to 
avoid any scene, she did her best to disguise all that was happening. 
Furthermore, she was far from reassured as to her father’s weakness. 
Before making any false promises to Herman, she resolved to clarify the situation.  
One morning she went into the  Colonel’s room.  
“Father,” she said respectfully, “ ’twould  appear the Senator intends to 
spend considerable time in Norrköping. Yet you have made a solemn 
promise to Herman that we would soon be wed. May I be so bold as to 
ask you whether you are still of  the same mind? And why, pray tell, is’t 
necessary to wait for the Count’s departure before celebrating a marriage 
which we all desire with equal ardor?”  
“Ernestine,” said the Colonel, “sit down and listen to me. As long as I 
believed, my dear child,” he w ent on, “that your fortune and happiness 
could be found with young Herman, far from standing in the way I did 
everything in my power, as you have seen, to hasten your wishes to a 
happy conclusion. But when a happier fate awaits you, Ernestine, why 
do you wish me to sacrifice you?”  “A happier fate, you say? If ’tis  my happiness you care about, Father, 
never for one moment imagine that it might lie with anyone save my 
beloved Herman: ’tis  only with him it can be assured. Never mind …I 
think I detect your plans …they appall me …. Ah! vouchsafe not to make 
me their victim.”  
“But, my child, my career depends upon these plans.”  
“Oh! Father, if the Count takes it upon himself to advance your 
fortune only at the price of obtaining my hand in marriage …so be it, 
then the  honors he promises you will be yours to enjoy, that I 
acknowledge, but he who sells them to you will not enjoy the prize he 
hopes for; I shall die before yielding to him.”  
“Ernestine, I judged your soul more tender …I thought you loved your 
father better.”  
“Ah! beloved author of my days, I thought your daughter was more 
precious to you, that …Wretched voyage! …vile seducer! …We were all 
happy before that man appeared here …we were faced with but a single 
obstacle, which we would have overcome. So long as my fat her was on 
my side, I feared nothing; when he abandons my camp, there is naught 
left for me to do but die ….” 
And the poor unhappy Ernestine, plunged into deep despair, was 
racked with sighs that would have moved even the hardest hearts to pity.  
“Listen, my  child, listen to what I have to say before you give way to 
such distress,” said the Colonel, wiping away with a gentle caress the 
tears wherewith his daughter’s face was covered. “The Count wishes to 
make me happy, and although he has not positively said to me that he 
would demand your hand in return, ’tis  easy enough to understand that 
such is his sole objective. He is sure, or so he pretends, that he can 
reinstate me into active military service; he requests that we go to live in Stockholm, he promises us the most flattering prospects if we do, and as 
soon as I arrive there he personally wishes to offer me, he says, a 
commission of a thousand ducats’ pension for my own past services and 
those of my father …a pension the Court, the Count hastens to add, 
would have granted long ago if we had had the least friend in the capital 
who would have spoken in our behalf. Ernestine …do you want to forgo 
all these favors? Do you mean you would turn your back on your own 
fortune, and upon mine?”  
“No, Father,” Sanders’ daughter replied firmly, “no I do not. But I ask 
one favor of you, and that is to put the Count to a test which I am sure he will fail. If he is serious in his intent to help you, as he says, and if he 
is honest, his friendship must be as steadfast as it is disinterested. If he 
imposes conditions upon it, his conduct is greatly to be feared: ’twould  
prove it is motivated by personal feelings, ’twould  from that moment 
onward prove ’twas  doubtless false. ’Tis  no longer a friend you are 
involved with, but my sed ucer.”  
“He will marry you.”  
“He will do no such thing. And furthermore, Father, mark well my 
words: if his sentiments with what regards you are real, they should be 
independent of those he may have conceived for me. He cannot wish to 
please you if, in so d oing, he is certain to make me suffer. He must, if he 
is virtuous and sensitive, exert his influence in your behalf as he has 
promised, without demanding me in return as his reward. In order to 
test the true manner of his thinking, tell him that you accept  all his 
promises, but that you request, as an initial show of his generosity with 
what regards me, that he personally arrange for the marriage of your 
daughter with the only man in the world she can ever love. If the Count 
is loyal, if he is frank, if he is disinterested, he will agree; if his intention is but to sacrifice me by serving you, then he will reveal his hand. He has 
to reply to your proposition, and that proposition on your part should 
not surprise him, since, you say, he has not openly asked y ou for my 
hand. If his reply is to ask for it in return for his good works in your 
behalf, then he reveals he is more interested in serving his own ends than 
he is in serving yours, since he will know I am engaged and that, despite 
my heart’s commitment, h e will still attempt to coerce me. In which 
case, the man’s soul is dishonest, and you should distrust his every offer, 
no matter in what glowing terms he describes it. A man of honor cannot 
aspire to the hand of a woman whose heart he knows will never be his. ’Tis not at the expense of the daughter that he must render service to her 
father. The test cannot fail, I beg you to try it …. If it succeeds …I mean 
if we become convinced that the Count’s intentions are legitimate, then we must consent to all he prop oses: he will have furthered your 
advancement without in any wise infringing upon my felicity, and we shall all be happy…. We shall all be, Father, and you will have no regrets.”  
“Ernestine,” said the Colonel, “ ’tis  very possible that the Count is an 
hone st man, even though he may wish to help me only upon condition 
that you become his wife.”  
“Yes, were it not for the fact he knows I am engaged. But when you 
remind him of this fact, if he persists in desiring to serve you only in return for gaining his end s with what regards me, then his schemes are 
motivated by egoism alone, he shows himself to be wholly lacking in refinement. Consequently we must judge all his promises as extremely 
dubious ….” 
And Ernestine, casting herself in the Colonel’s arms:  “O Father ,” she cried, tears bathing her face, “grant me the test I 
demand, do not refuse me this one request, Father, I beseech you, do not 
sacrifice so cruelly a daughter whom you adore and who cannot live 
without you. Poor Herman would die of a broken heart, he would die hating us, I would soon follow him to the grave, and you would have lost 
the two souls your heart cherishes most deeply.”  
The Colonel loved his daughter; he was a generous and noble man. 
All one might reproach him for was that sort of good faith which, 
though it makes the honest man such an easy target for knaves, none the 
less reveals the full candor and frankness of a beautiful soul. He promised his daughter to do everything she asked, and the following day 
he spoke to the Senator.  
Oxtiern, more  perfidious than Mademoiselle Sanders was delicate and 
discriminate, and who together with Madame Scholtz had doubtless 
foreseen every eventuality and prepared for it, replied to the Colonel in 
the manner most likely to give him entire satisfaction.  
“You m ean you thought I was offering to help you out of my own 
selfish interest, my dear fellow? I would that you knew my heart better: 
’tis filled with naught but the desire to be useful to you, quite apart from 
any other considerations. Assuredly, I love your daughter. ’Twould  serve 
no purpose to conceal the fact from you. But the moment she deems I 
am incapable of making her happy, far be it from me to exert the least 
pressure to dissuade her. I shall not undertake to help her tie the bonds 
of hymen here, as you seem to desire: ’twould  be too painful to my 
wounded heart. If I am to be sacrificed, allow me at least the privilege of 
not participating in the sacrifice myself. But the marriage shall take 
place; I shall contribute in some way to it and delegate my authority in 
the matter to Madame Scholtz. Since your daughter prefers to become the wife of a bookkeeper rather than of one of the foremost senators of 
Sweden, let the choice be hers. Have no fears that her choice prove 
harmful in any wise to the services I wish to render you. I intend to leave 
shortly. As soon as I have put a few urgent affairs in order, a carriage of mine will come to fetch you and your daughter. You and Ernestine will 
come to Stockholm; Herman can follow close behind and wed her there, 
or, if you prefer, wait here until I have succeeded in placing you in the 
post I have in mind for you, which would enhance the marriage.”  
“Worthy man!” said Sanders, clasping the Count’s hands in his own, 
“how grateful I am to you! The favors you vouchsafe to perform in our behalf will become all the more precious for being disinterested, and for 
having been done at the cost of a great personal sacrifice …. Ah! Senator, 
’tis the ultimate degree of human generosity. In a century when virtue is 
so rare indeed, so noble an act should be rewarded by temples built to 
commemorate it.”  
“My friend,” said the Count in reply to the Colonel’s compliments, 
“an honest man is the first to benefit from the good he does. Are good deeds not the sustenance of his happiness?”  
The Colonel wasted no time in relating to his daughter the crucial 
conversation he had just had with Oxtiern. Ernestine was touched to tears by it, and was completely taken in by everything he said. Noble 
souls are unsuspecting, and easily convince themselve s of the good in 
others of which they see themselves capable. Herman was not quite so 
credulous. A few rash remarks that Madame Scholtz had let slip, 
doubtless because of her joy at seeing her revenge all but assured, gave 
rise to certain suspicions which he communicated to his mistress; this 
tender girl reassured him; she insinuated that a man of Oxtiern’s birth 
and station must perforce be incapable of duplicity …. The innocent creature, little did she know that vice, buttressed by noble birth and high 
station, and emboldened by impunity, becomes all the more dangerous.  
Herman said that he would like to have the matter out personally with 
the Count; Ernestine forbade him to resort to violence; the young man declared that such was not his intention. But esse ntially heeding naught 
but the dictates of his pride, his courage, and his love, he loaded two pistols. The following morning he slipped into the Count’s bedchamber, and surprising him while he was still abed, he said to him boldly:  
“Monsieur, I believe you to be a man of honor. Your name, your 
station, your wealth, all these persuade me that this is so. I therefore demand your word, Monsieur, your written word that you renounce all 
claims, the attentions you have displayed notwithstanding, to the 
affections of Ernestine. If you refuse, I shall expect you to accept one of these two weapons and engage me in a duel to the death.”  
The Senator, taken slightly aback by the compliment, began by asking 
Herman whether he had reflected seriously about what he was suggesting, and whether he believed a man of his high station was 
required to make any amends to a subaltern such as himself?  
“Spare me your insults, Monsieur,” Herman replied, “ ’tis  not to hear 
your invectives I have come here, but, on the contrary, to ask that you 
give me satisfaction for the outrage you have done me in trying to seduce 
my mistress. A subaltern, you say, Senator! Every man has the right to demand redress for something that has been taken from him, or for an 
offense he has suffered. The prej udice which makes a distinction among 
the classes is pure fantasy. Nature has created all men equal; there is not 
a single one amongst us who has not issued from his mother’s womb 
naked and poor, not one whom she preserves or whom she annihilates 
different ly from any other. The sole distinction among them I recognize is that which virtue confers upon them. The only man who is born to be 
the object of our contempt is he who uses the rights granted unto him by 
false conventions merely to indulge with greater impunity in vice. On 
your feet, Count! Were you a prince of royal blood, I would still demand from you the satisfaction which is due me. Get up, I say, and prepare to 
defend yourself forthwith, or I shall blow your brains out there where 
you lie.”  
“One mom ent, young man,” said the Count, slipping on his clothes. 
“Sit down, and let us have breakfast before we duel …. Would you deny 
me this one request?”  
“As you wish, Count,” Herman replied, “but I trust that afterward you 
will consent to give me the satisfact ion I demand ….” 
The Count rang, breakfast was served, and the Senator, having given 
strict orders to be left alone with Herman, asked him, after their initial 
cup of coffee, whether all this had been undertaken with the knowledge 
and consent of Ernestine.  
“Most certainly not, Senator! She is completely unaware that I am 
here; and, what is more, she did her best to convince me you were 
interested in being of service to me.”  
“If this be true, can you explain to me what made you act in such a 
rash manner?”  
“The fear of being deceived, the certainty that once one has loved 
Ernestine ’tis impossible to conceive of giving her up. In short, the desire 
to have it out with you, to reach some sort of understanding with you.”  
“You soon will, Herman, and though I owe you naught but 
reproaches for the immoderation of your methods …though this ill -
considered scheme might well have caused me to change my plans with 
what regards helping the Colonel’s daughter, I shall none the less keep my word …. Yes, Herman, you shall marry Ernestine; ’tis a promise I 
have made, and one I shall keep. I am yielding nothing to you, young 
man; I am not the kind of man who need yield anything to you. ’Tis  
Ernestine and she alone who wins from me whatever she will, and ’tis  for 
her happiness that I sacrifice my own!”  
“Oh, noble and generous man!”  
“You owe me nothing, I tell you. I have done it for Ernestine, and ’tis  
from her alone I would expect any show of gratitude.”  
“Allow me to share that gratitude, Senator, and permit me at the same 
time to o ffer a thousand excuses for my hastiness and outburst …. But, 
Monsieur, can I count upon your keeping your word, and if indeed you 
intend to keep it, would you refuse me the favor of putting your 
agreement into writing?”  
“I shall indeed; I shall write whate ver you like, but ’tis  pointless, and 
these ill- founded suspicions only add to the folly you have just 
committed.”  
“’Tis in order to reassure Ernestine.”  
“She is less distrustful than you; she believes me. No matter; I have no 
objection to writing what you ask, but upon condition it be addressed to 
her. To do otherwise would be in bad taste, I cannot both serve you and 
abase myself before you ….” 
And taking a writing desk, the Senator penned the following lines:  
Count Oxtiern hereby promises Ernestine Sander s to allow her to 
make her own free choice, and to take the most opportune measures 
necessary to enable her to enjoy forthwith the pleasures of hymen, no 
matter what the cost may be to him who adores her, whose sacrifice 
will soon be as certain as ’twill  be horrible.  Poor Herman, who failed completely to understand the cruel 
ambiguity the note contained, took it from the Count, kissed it 
passionately, reiterated his excuses for the rashness whereof he had been 
guilty, and flew to Ernestine, bearing her the sad trophies of his victory.  
Mademoiselle Sanders reprimanded Herman sharply and accused him 
of having no confidence in her. She added that, after what she had told him, Herman should never have resorted to such extreme measures with a man whose station wa s so far above him in life, that it was now to be 
feared that the Count, perhaps having yielded to Herman’s demands only out of concern for his own safety, would upon reflection be subsequently impelled to take extreme measures of his own which might 
be fa tal for them both and which, in any event, would doubtless prove 
most harmful to her father.  
Herman hastened to reassure his mistress, reminded her of the 
promises contained in the Count’s note …which she had also read 
without perceiving the ambiguity conta ined therein. They revealed all 
that had taken place to the Colonel, who disapproved of Herman’s 
conduct even more keenly than had his daughter. None the less, they 
finally reconciled their differences, and our three friends, full confident 
that the Count would keep his word, separated feeling considerably 
reassured.  
Meanwhile, immediately after his scene with Herman, Oxtiern had 
gone downstairs to Madame Scholtz’s chambers, and there recounted to her everything that had happened. That wicked woman, ever mo re 
convinced by the young man’s intemperate act that ’twas  becoming 
impossible to hope that she might one day seduce him, cast her lot more completely with the Count’s cause, and promised him that she would 
serve him until poor Herman had been completely c rushed or destroyed.  “I have sure means of causing his downfall,” this cruel wench declared. 
“I have a set of duplicate keys to his strongbox, though he is unaware of 
it. I must shortly redeem the sum of a hundred thousand ducats for bills 
of exchange due and payable to some Hamburg merchants. I can easily 
arrange to find him in error; at which time he will have the choice either 
of marrying me or of being utterly ruined.”  
“Were he to choose the latter,” said the Count, “you shall inform me 
forthwith; you m ay be certain I shall take all necessary steps which our 
mutual desire for revenge requires.”  
Then the two villains, all too cruelly united by common  interests, laid 
their final plans to give their perfidious schemes the full stability and baseness they de sired.  
Once these arrangements had been made, Oxtiern came to take his 
leave of the Colonel and his daughter. In her presence he restrained 
himself, and rather than reveal to her his love and true intentions, gave 
evidence of all the nobility and disintere stedness that his hypocrisy 
enabled him to summon forth. He repeated his generous offers to 
Sanders to be of service to him, and they agreed that the Colonel would 
keep to his plan concerning a visit to Stockholm. The Count urged that 
Sanders and his daugh ter consent to stay with him during their sojourn 
in the capital, but the Colonel replied that he would prefer to stay with his relative, Madame Plorman, whose fortune he was expecting his 
daughter to inherit. He pointed out that this token of friendship would 
give Ernestine an opportunity to deal tactfully with this woman, who 
was in a position to augment considerably her fortune. Oxtiern approved 
of the plan; they agreed that the voyage should be made by carriage, 
because Ernestine was afraid of the sea, and they took leave of one 
another with the most touching declarations of friendship and mutual esteem, without Herman’s rash venture ever once having been 
mentioned in the course of their conversation.  
Madame Scholtz continued her hypocritic ways with Her man. 
Feeling the need to conceal her true sentiments until the plot she was preparing was fully hatched, she made no mention to him of her feelings 
and, in contrast with the way she had previously acted, she now evinced 
naught but solicitous concern for and interest in him. She concealed from him the fact that she had learned of the blunder he had made in 
visiting the Count, and our worthy young man continued under the 
mistaken impression that, as the Count had not emerged from the confrontation in a very g ood light, he had taken pains to keep it a secret.  
None the less, Herman was not unaware of the fact that the Colonel 
and his daughter were planning to leave Norrköping. But, full confident that his mistress’ heart was wholly his, that the Colonel’s friend ship was 
steadfast, and that the Count’s word was as good as gold, he had not the slightest doubt but that the first use to which Ernestine would put her influence with the Senator upon arriving in Stockholm would be to 
make him arrange for their immediate  marriage. Sanders’ daughter had 
constantly assured him that such was her intention, and indeed she 
sincerely believed her own words.  
Thus several weeks went by, when one day the people of Norrköping 
saw a superb carriage arrive, attended by several valets , who brought with 
them a letter from Count Oxtiern to Colonel Sanders, and instructions to await that officer’s orders relative to the voyage he was to make to 
Stockholm together with his daughter, for which the carriage they were 
accompanying was intende d. 
The letter announced to Sanders that, through the Senator’s good 
offices, the widow Plorman was expecting her two relatives and had indeed prepared for them the best chambers in her house; it went on to 
say that she would expect them any time they might  care to come, and 
that the Count would await that moment in order to discover to his friend Sanders the results of the initial efforts he had made in his behalf. With what regarded Herman, the Senator added, he deemed it best that 
he be left behind to conclude without distraction the affairs that he had 
yet to settle with Madame Scholtz. Once they were concluded, and with his fortune in order, he would be in a much better position to come and 
offer his hand to the beautiful Ernestine. He further added that  everyone 
would benefit from this arrangement, for during this same time the 
Colonel, honored with a pension and perhaps with a commission, would 
be even better situated to help his daughter.  
This clause displeased Ernestine; it aroused some suspicions in her, 
which she lost no time in communicating to her father. The Colonel 
pretended that he had never conceived of Oxtiern’s plans in other terms 
than those outlined in his letter.  
“And furthermore,” Sanders continued, “how could you expect 
Herman to leave N orrköping before he has settled his financial affairs 
with Madame Scholtz?”  
Ernestine shed a few tears and, still caught between her desire not to 
harm her father and her love for Herman, she did not dare to dwell upon her extreme inclination not to take a dvantage of the Senator’s offers until 
such time as her beloved Herman was free to join them.  
They had therefore to make up their minds to leave. The Colonel 
invited Herman to come and dine with them the evening of their 
departure, in order to bid one anot her a fond farewell. He came to 
dinner, and their leave -taking, that painful moment of departure, did not 
take place without the keenest display of emotion.  “O my beloved Ernestine,” said Herman, his face bathed in tears, “I 
take my leave; I cannot say whe ther I shall ever see you again. You are 
leaving me behind with a cruel enemy …with a woman who disguises her 
true sentiments, which, I fear, are yet far from being annihilated within 
her heart. To whom shall I turn for help when this wench overwhelms 
me wi th the countless troubles whereof she is full capable? …when she 
sees me more than ever determined to follow you, and when I have 
declared to her that my heart can never be given to anyone but you? And 
what about you? Where, Great God, are you both going? T o a place 
where you will be dependent upon a man who has loved you, who loves 
you still …and whose sacrifice is scarce worthy of belief. He will seduce 
you, Ernestine, he will dazzle you and blind you; and poor Herman, abandoned to his fate, will have naugh t to comfort him but his own 
tears.”  
“Herman will always have Ernestine’s heart,” said Mademoiselle 
Sanders, clasping her lover’s hands in hers. “Can he ever fear that this heart, which is his alone, could ever betray him?”  
“Ah! may I never lose it,” said Herman, casting himself at the feet of 
his beautiful mistress. “May Ernestine, never yielding to the solicitations to which she is sure to be subjected, remain convinced that ’tis  
impossible for there ever to be on the face of the earth a man who loves her as deeply as do I!”  
And the hapless young man dared to ask Ernestine to allow that he 
cull from her rosy -colored lips a precious kiss which might serve him as a 
pledge for the promises he had asked of her. The wise and worthy young 
daughter of Colonel Sanders, who had never before granted him so 
much as he was now asking, none the less deemed the circumstances 
were such as to allow it, and buried herself in Herman’s arms. Herman, who was burning with love and desire, and succumbing to that plethora 
of somb er joy whose sole expression is the shedding of tears, sealed his 
declarations of love upon the most beautiful mouth in the world, and from these selfsame lips, still planted upon his, received the most delightful expressions of both love and constancy.  
Yet the baleful hour of departure at last arrived. For two hearts truly 
in love, what difference is there between this hour and the hour of death? It seems as though, upon leaving the object one loves, one’s heart 
literally breaks; ’tis  as though our organs,  as it were enchained to the 
cherished object whom we are leaving, wither away and die at this cruel 
moment. One wishes to fly away, one retraces one’s steps, embraces once 
again, bids one last farewell, finds it impossible to make up one’s mind 
to do so; finally compelled to leave, ’tis  as though we had lost possession 
of our very faculties, as though the vital force which motivates our life 
had abandoned us, and what remains is dull and senseless, that the full 
meaning of existence lies but in the person from whom we are taking our 
leave.  
The Colonel had decided that they would leave directly they had 
finished dinner. Ernestine cast a last look at her lover, whose face was 
bathed in tears; her heart literally broke within her …. 
“O Father,” she cried out, breaking into tears herself, “see the sacrifice 
I am making for you.” And, again throwing herself into Herman’s arms: “You whom I have never ceased to love,” she said to him, “you whom I 
shall love to the very edge of the grave, receive here in the presence of 
my father the solemn oath which I hereby make never to belong to 
anyone but you. Write to me, let your thoughts be of me, never listen to 
anything save what I am now saying, and consider me the most vile of creatures if ever another save yourself recei ves either my hand or my 
heart.”  
Herman was in a state of extreme agitation. He bent to the ground 
and kissed the feet of her whom he worshiped. It was as though, by 
means of these ardent kisses, his soul which impressed them, his entire 
soul, was, with th ese fiery kisses, striving to subdue and enthrall 
Ernestine …. 
“I shall never see you again …I shall never see you again,” he 
murmured above the sobs wherewith he was enveloped …. “Father, let 
me follow you directly; suffer not that they take Ernestine from m e or, if 
this is the fate to which I am condemned, alas! then plunge your sword into my heart!”  
The Colonel reassured and calmed his friend, he gave him his word of 
honor never to stand in the way of his daughter’s desires; but that love 
which feareth the worst can never be soothed. Seldom have two lovers 
taken leave of each other under such cruel circumstances; Herman sensed it only too well, and despite himself his heart was broken. But at 
last they had to leave …. Ernestine, overwhelmed with sorrow, her eyes 
filled with tears, climbed up beside her father into a carriage which bore 
her from the presence of him she loved. At that moment Herman had a vision wherein he thought he saw Death envelop with its dark wings the 
funereal carriage which was spiriting away from him his sweetest possession. His mournful cries rang out after her, calling Ernestine, his 
distraught soul sped after her, but she was gone, he could no longer see 
any trace of them …. All was gone …all was lost in the deep shadows of 
the night, an d the wretched young man returned to Madame Scholtz’s 
in such a violent state that he managed to increase even further the jealousy of this dangerous monster.  The Colonel and his daughter reached Stockholm the following day, 
and upon their arrival found awaiting them, at Madame Plorman’s door, 
Senator Oxtiern, who presented his hand to Ernestine. Although it had 
been several years since the Colonel had seen his relative, he was none the less very warmly received. But it was easy to see that the Senator’s 
influence had had a prodigious effect upon the welcome they had 
received. Ernestine was much admired and flattered. Her aunt asserted that her beautiful niece would eclipse all the beauties of the capital, and 
that very day arrangements were made to procure her every possible 
pleasure, in order to make her head swim, to make her drunk with joy, and cause her to forget her lover.  
Madame Plorman’s house was naturally a solitary one. This woman, 
already well along in years and by nature avaricious, entertained but seldom. And ’twas  perhaps for this very reason that the Count, who 
knew her ways, was in no wise upset at the choice of dwelling the Colonel had settled upon.  
Madame Plorman had living with her a young officer of the 
Regimental Guards, who was a degree closer to her in relationship than 
was Ernestine; he, consequently, had a greater claim to her inheritance. 
Sindersen by name, he was a decent fellow, a gallant young man, but one 
who quite naturally looked somewhat askance at relatives who, less 
closely r elated to Madame Plorman than he, none the less seemed to 
have formulated the same designs upon her fortune. This knowledge 
created a slight coolness between him and the Sanderses. None the less, 
he was all civility and urbanity with Ernestine, and knew how to disguise 
beneath this worldly gloss we call politeness the slightly less affectionate 
sentiments which held sway in his heart.  But let us leave the Colonel to get settled in his new dwelling and 
return to Norrköping, while Oxtiern bends his every effort to make a 
dazzling impression upon Ernestine, to keep her father amused, and in 
short to bring to a successful conclusion his treacherous schemes.  
A week and a day following Ernestine’s departure, the merchants 
from Hamburg arrived to claim the hundred thousand ducats owed them by Madame Scholtz. That sum was presumed to be safely locked in Herman’s safe. But the duplicity was already done and, thanks to her 
duplicate set of keys, the funds were no longer there.  
Madame Scholtz, who had invited the merchants to remain for 
dinner, straightway sent word to Herman to prepare their money, given 
that her guests wished to leave by boat that same evening for Stockholm. 
It had been some time since Herman had inspected that safe, but certain that the money was ther e, he confidently opened it, and almost fainted 
dead away when he realized that it had been robbed. He recovered his senses and ran to inform his protectress …. 
“Oh! Madame,” he cried, in a state of distraction, “we’ve been 
robbed!”  
“Robbed, you say! My fri end, no one has broken in here, and I can 
answer for the integrity of my own household.”  
“Yet someone must have broken in, Madame …it could not be 
otherwise, since the money is gone! And you certainly are sure of me!”  
“I used to be, Herman, but when love turns the head of a boy such as 
you, it opens the floodgates of his heart to every kind of vice …. You 
miserable young man, beware of what you may have done. I need my 
money forthwith. If you are guilty, confess your error to me …but if you 
have done wrong and  persist in keeping it from me, ’tis  not you alone I 
may implicate in this fatal affair …. Ernestine left for Stockholm at the same time that my money disappeared…who can say whether she has 
not fled the country? …She precedes you …’tis  a premeditated theft.”  
“No, Madame, no, you do not for one moment believe what you are 
saying,” Herman replied firmly. “You do not believe your own words, Madame. No thief commences his career by stealing such an enormous 
sum, and the major crimes in the hearts of men are alway s preceded by a 
previous display of vice. What have you seen from me till now that 
would lead you to believe I am capable of such embezzlement? Had I 
committed the theft, would I still be here in Norrköping? Has it not 
been more than a week since you first  informed me this money would 
have to be paid? If indeed I had stolen it, would I have the effrontery to 
wait peacefully for the day of reckoning when my shame would be 
revealed? Is such conduct imaginable, and do you suppose I am capable of it?”  
“’Tis not for me to search out the reasons which might account for 
your actions when I am the party injured by your crime, Herman. I am certain of this much only, and that is that you are in charge of my safe, 
you alone are responsible for it, ’tis  empty when I hav e need of the 
money presumed to be contained therein, the locks are in no wise 
tampered with, none of my people has run away. This theft, which reveals no signs of burglary from without, whereof there is not a single 
trace, could only be the handiwork of t he person who possesses the keys. 
For the last time, Herman, examine your heart and conscience. I shall 
make up some excuse to keep the merchants here another twenty -four 
hours. Tomorrow my money …or I shall have to call upon the authorities 
to sort the matter out.”  
Herman left the room in a state of despair easier felt than described. 
He burst into tears and charged Heaven with the responsibility for allowing him to live only to be beset by so many misfortunes. Two 
choices lay open to him: to flee, or to bl ow out his brains …but no sooner 
had he formulated the one and the other than he put both of them out of his mind with horror …. Die without vindicating himself? …without 
cleansing himself of suspicions which would greatly distress Ernestine? 
Would she ever r ecover from the blow of having given her heart to a 
man capable of such abject conduct? Her delicate soul would never 
sustain such a blow, the sorrow would bring her to her grave …. To flee 
would be tantamount to admitting one’s guilt; were it possible thus  to 
provide grounds for accusing him of a crime he had never committed? Herman decided to leave the matter up to fate, and by letter to call upon 
the protection of the Senator and the friendship of the Colonel. He 
believed he could count upon the former, a nd felt absolutely certain of 
the latter. He wrote to them, recounting the terrible misfortune that had 
just befallen him, emphasized his innocence in a most convincing 
manner, and especially stressed to the Colonel how fatal such a situation might become for him, involving as it did a woman whose heart, filled 
with jealousy, would not pass up the opportunity to eliminate him. He 
urged them to advise him as to a course of action without any delay, then 
commended himself to the decrees of Heaven, daring to b elieve as a 
certainty that their impartiality would not allow his innocence to suffer 
unjustly.  
You can easily imagine what a terrible night our young man spent. 
Early the following morning Madame Scholtz summoned him to her chambers.  
“Well, my friend,” sh e said to him with an air of graciousness and 
candor, “are you ready to confess your errors, and are you now of a mind to tell me what impelled you to do such a singular thing?”  “I offer myself, and surrender myself for any justification,” the young 
man re plied bravely. “I would not have remained under your roof had I 
been guilty of the crime whereof I am accused. You gave me the time to 
flee, I would have taken advantage of it.”  
“Perhaps you would not have gotten very far without being followed, 
and such a  flight would have been an admission of your crime. Your 
flight would have proved we were dealing with an inexperienced thief; your firmness leads me to believe ’tis  with a hardened thief we are 
involved.”  
“We can settle our accounts whenever you wish, Mad ame. Until such 
time as you find them in error, you have no right to treat me thus, and I 
have the right to request that you have more certain proof of my guilt 
before casting any slurs upon my integrity.”  
“Herman, is this what I had the right to expect fr om the young man 
whom I raised as my own child and in whom I had placed my every hope?”  
“’Tis not an answer to what I have said, Madame. That you resort to 
this subterfuge surprises me; in fact ’twould  almost arouse certain doubts 
in my mind.”  
“Do not prov oke me, Herman, do not provoke me when you ought to 
be doing everything within your power to move me to pity,” she said, before adding warmly: “Are you not aware, cruel creature, of my 
sentiments toward you? Who then, this being the case, would be most 
inclined to conceal your misdeeds?… Would I try and uncover faults 
when I would gladly shed my own blood to extirpate those you already 
have? …Listen, Herman, I can repair the damage. I have deposited in 
various banks ten times more than is required to cover th e missing sum. All I ask is that you confess to the theft …consent to marry me, and the 
whole affair will be forgotten.”  
“And, as my reward for this horrible lie, I shall be given the greatest 
misfortune ever to befall me?”  
“The greatest misfortune ever to befall you, false -hearted boy! What! 
’Tis thus you conceive of the bonds I propose, when a single word from 
me will seal your doom forever?”  
“You are not unaware, Madame, that my heart is no longer mine to 
offer. Ernestine possesses it entirely. Anything which threatens to 
interfere with the plans we have to join our destinies can only be regarded as hideous to me.”  
“Ernestine? …Give her not another moment’s thought. She is already 
Oxtiern’s wife.”  
“Ernestine? …’Tis  utterly impossible, Madame; I have her word, and 
her heart. She is incapable of deceiving me.”  
“The whole matter was arranged in advance; the Colonel was a party 
to it.”  
“Merciful Heaven! All right! I shall find out for myself. I shall fly 
immediately to Stockholm …there I shall see Ernestine and learn from 
her own lips whether what you are saying is true …. What am I saying? 
Ernestine capable of betraying her lover! No, never …you do not know 
the workings of her heart, since you are capable of believing such a story. No, Madame, the sun would cease to  bless us with its light before so 
heinous a crime could ever besoil Ernestine’s heart.”  
And upon these words the young man made as though to dash from 
the house …. Madame Scholtz, detaining him:  
“Herman, you are running off to your own ruin. Listen to me, my 
friend, ’tis the last time I shall speak to you …. Must I say it? There are six witnesses who have signed depositions against you; you were seen 
taking my money from the house; the use whereto you put it is also 
known: you distrusted Count Oxtiern. Provided with these hundred 
thousand ducats, you planned to abduct Ernestine and take her with you to England …. Judicial proceedings are already under way, I must stress 
that fact to you. A single word from me will stop them …. Here is my 
hand, Herman; accept it , and the whole affair is forgotten.”  
“A tissue of horrors and lies!” Herman cried out. “See how glaring are 
the lies and inconsistencies in what you say! If, as you pretend, Ernestine is already wed to the Senator, there is no reason why I should have stolen for her sake the sums missing from your coffers; and if indeed I 
took that money for her, then ’tis  false that she is the Count’s wife. The 
moment you are able to lie so rashly, this whole affair stands revealed as a pure fabrication, a trap wherein your wickedness would ensnare me. 
But I shall find the means —or so I dare at least believe —to regain for 
myself the honor whereof you would strip me, and those who will 
remain convinced of my innocence will at the same time prove you guilty 
of the crimes you have hatched in order to avenge yourself for my 
disdain.”  
So saying, and thrusting aside the arm which Madame Scholtz again 
raised to restrain him, he immediately dashed out into the street, 
intending to flee to Stockholm. Poor Herman! …little did he reali ze that 
his chains were already forged and waiting …. On Madame Scholtz’s 
doorstep, ten men seized him and dragged him ignominiously through the streets to the prison reserved for hardened criminals, while that 
savage creature responsible for his ruin looke d on, seeming to enjoy, as 
she watched him being dragged away, the spectacle of misfortune 
wherein her unbridled rage had just engulfed this wretched young man.  “Great God!” said Herman, seeing himself cast into the abode of 
crime …and all too often of injustice, “is’t possible for Heaven to invent 
any further sorrows wherewith to burden my heart even more? 
Oxtiern…false -hearted Oxtiern, you are the artful schemer responsible 
for this entire plot, and ’tis  your jealousy that has brought me here; I am 
the vic tim of your own jealousy and that of your accomplices …. ’Tis thus 
that men can be plunged from one moment to the next into the utter depths of humiliation and despair! I fancied that ’twas  crime alone could 
bring them to such a sorry pass …. No …all that is required to make 
them criminal is the mere shadow of suspicion; one needs but to have powerful enemies in order to be annihilated! But you, Ernestine, you 
whose solemn pledges still console my heart, is yours still wholly mine in 
this time of affliction? I s your innocence still as entire as mine? Or is’t 
possible you are somehow implicated in this affair?…O Merciful 
Heaven! What terrible suspicions! That I could have harbored such a 
thought, even for a moment, oppresses me more than all the other wrongs whe rewith I am overwhelmed. Ernestine guilty! …Ernestine 
capable of having betrayed her lover! …Never could either fraud or deceit 
find any room in her sensitive soul! …And that tender kiss which I still 
cherish …this one, this tender kiss which I received from h er, could it 
have been culled from lips sullied by lies? …No, never, beloved soul, no, 
it could not …. We are both the pawns of deceit …. How these monsters 
will try and take advantage of my situation to debase me in your eyes …. 
Heaven -sent angel, do not be d eceived by the artful stratagems of evil 
men, and may your soul, as pure as the God by Whom it was given, be 
as shielded as its model from the iniquities of this world.”  
A silent, somber sorrow seized hold of this miserable man. As he 
slowly began to reali ze the full horror of his situation, his grief became so overwhelming that he began to struggle and thrash about in the midst of 
his irons. At times ’twas  the thought of proving his innocence that 
motivated his movements; at others, ’twas  to the feet of Er nestine he 
would run. He writhed on the floor, the vaults above his head rang out with his piercing cries …. He got to his feet, he hurled himself against 
the walls around him, striving to break them with his weight. He battered himself mercilessly against them, he was covered with blood and, falling again near the barriers which he had not even shaken, the 
only signs of life in his beleaguered soul were the tears and sobs and 
moans of despair which issued from him.  
There is no situation under the sun that c an be compared to that of a 
prisoner whose heart is aflame with love. The impossibility of communicating, of reaching an understanding or dissolving one’s doubts straightway brings all the ills of this sentiment into focus in a most 
frightful manner; the b enevolent features of a loving God are, for the 
prisoner, but so many vipers attacking his heart; a thousand fantasies 
becloud his vision; by turns anxious and calm, now credulous and the 
next moment filled with dread suspicion, both fearing and desiring t he 
truth, detesting and adoring the object of his passion, believing her to be 
false and at the same time excusing her perfidious ways, his soul, like the waves of an angry sea, is naught but a spongelike mass which absorbs all 
passions and by them is cons umed all the more quickly.  
The authorities hastened to succor Herman. But what a baleful favor 
they were doing him by raising the cup of life to his grieving lips, when there remained for him within naught but the bitter lees!  
Feeling the necessity to defe nd himself, and realizing that his 
overwhelming desire to see Ernestine could only be brought about by proving his innocence, he assumed his own defense. The judicial inquiry was opened, but the case was deemed too important to be heard before a 
lower trib unal such as that of Norrköping, and was transferred to a 
higher court in Stockholm. The prisoner was taken to Stockholm, where he was happy (if indeed the term is applicable to such a cruel situation) to be able to breathe the same air as his beloved Erne stine.  
“I shall be in the same town as she,” he said to himself before he was 
moved to the capital. “Perhaps I may even be able to apprise her of my fate…which is doubtless being concealed from her !…Perhaps I may even 
manage to see her. But regardless of w hat may happen, I shall be there, 
less vulnerable to the plots directed against me. ’Tis  impossible for 
whatever comes in contact with Ernestine not to be purified by the 
proximity of her beautiful soul; the brilliance of her virtues reflects upon 
everythi ng around her …. They are the rays of the sun which give life to 
the earth …. I have nothing to fear so long as she is near.”  
Poor credulous lovers, such are the fantasies which fill your 
hearts …they comfort you, ’tis  a gift not lightly to be dismissed.  
Let us now leave the unfortunate Herman, to see what is happening 
in Stockholm among those persons with whom we are concerned.  
Ernestine, with her constant distractions and her continual round of 
festivities, had none the less not forgotten her beloved Herman;  far from 
it. She surrendered naught but her eyes to the new spectacles with which they were trying to impress her, but her heart, still filled with her lover, had no room for anyone other than him. She would have preferred that 
he be present to share her pleasures, which were pale and insipid without 
him. She desired him, she saw him at every turn, and the loss of her 
illusion only made the truth of her situation all the more cruel. Poor 
Ernestine had not the slightest inkling of the dreadful state to whic h the 
man who occupied her thoughts with such despotic sway had been reduced. All she had received from him was one letter, written before the 
arrival of the merchants from Hamburg, and sure measures had been 
taken since then to make certain that she recei ve no further word from 
him. Whenever she expressed her concern about his silence, her father 
and the Senator simply blamed these delays upon the magnitude of the 
business affairs for which the young man was responsible, and sweet 
Ernestine, whose delicate  soul feared the very thought of sorrow, let 
herself gently be lulled into believing whatever seemed to calm her 
troubled heart. Was she plagued by further reflections? Again they 
reassured her in the same manner, the Colonel in all good faith, the Senator  out of sheer hypocrisy; but reassure her they did, and 
meanwhile, beneath her feet, the abyss was steadily being prepared.  
Oxtiern was also making sure that Sanders was enjoying himself, and 
had arranged for him to be invited to the homes of several minis ters. 
These marks of attention flattered the Colonel’s pride; they also made him more indulgent concerning the Count’s delay in keeping his word, and Oxtiern never tired of telling him that, all his efforts 
notwithstanding, the wheels of the Court were wont to grind slowly.  
This dangerous suborner who, had he been able to attain his desired 
ends by some other manner than through the crimes he was contemplating, might have refrained from committing them, attempted 
upon occasion to revert to the language of l ove with her whom he was 
yearning to corrupt.  
“There are times when I regret the efforts I am exerting in your 
behalf,” he said one day to Ernestine. “I can feel that the power of your 
eyes is eroding my courage by slow degrees. My honesty compels me to 
keep my word and arrange for your marriage with Herman, but my heart 
resists. O Merciful Heaven! why does the hand of Nature both endow fair Ernestine with so many graces and implant such seeds of weakness 
in Oxtiern’s heart? I would serve you better were you less beautiful; or 
perhaps I would love you less were you not so unyielding.”  
“Count Oxtiern,” said Ernestine, much alarmed by his words, “I 
thought these sentiments had long ago been put out of your mind, and I 
cannot conceive that you are still preoccupied with them!”  
“’Tis to give but slight credit to either of the following possibilities, 
and that is to believe that the impressions you provoke are any less 
strong than they were before, or to imagine that, when ’tis  my heart that 
has received them, the y might be less than eternal.”  
“Can they be reconciled with the question of honor? And did you not 
swear by all that is holy that you would bring me to Stockholm only in 
order to further my father’s career and to help arrange my marriage with Herman? Was t his not what you solemnly promised?”  
“Herman! always Herman, Ernestine. Tell me, is there no way to 
make you forget this baleful name?”  
“Assuredly not, Senator, ’tis  a name I shall utter so long as the 
cherished image of him who bears it shall remain grave n in my soul, and 
I must forewarn you that death alone could alter this situation. But 
Count, why do you dally so in fulfilling your promised obligations? I 
should soon be seeing —’tis  your own words I repeat —this beloved and 
unique object of my love; why, therefore, is he so slow in joining us 
here?”  
“His accounting problems with Madame Scholtz, ’tis  certainly the 
reason for this delay which so disturbs you.”  
“Directly that is done, will he join us?”  
“Yes…you will see him then, Ernestine …. I promise you tha t I shall 
arrange for you to see him, regardless of how much it may pain me…regardless of the place where you will be reunited …you will 
certainly see him …. And what will be my reward for these services 
rendered?”  
“The pleasure you derive, Count, from having rendered them; for a 
sensitive soul, there is none greater.”  
“To purchase such a pleasure at the cost of the sacrifice you require is 
to pay it very dearly, Ernestine. Do you think there are many souls 
capable of such an effort?”  
“The greater the effort,  the more deserving I shall find you.”  
“Ah! how cold the epithet ‘deserving’ is, and how poorly it describes 
the sentiments I have for you!”  
“But if ’tis  the most you can expect to obtain from me, should it not 
satisfy you?”  
“Never …never!” the Count then s aid, casting a furious look at poor 
Ernestine …. And, immediately rising to take his leave: “You do not 
know the soul that you are flouting, Ernestine …you are blind, too 
blind …. No, you do not know that soul, you do not know to what 
lengths your contempt and disdain can drive it.”  
It is easy to imagine that these last words left Ernestine in a state of 
alarm. She wasted no time recounting them to the Colonel who, still 
completely convinced of the Senator’s integrity, failed to see in them the 
meaning that Er nestine had sensed. The credulous Sanders, wrapped up 
in his ambitions, upon occasion reverted to the theme of his preferring 
the Count to Herman as a son- in-law. But at these times his daughter 
reminded him of his word, to which the frank and honest Colonel was a 
thrall. He yielded to Ernestine’s tears and vowed to keep on reminding 
the Senator of the promises he had made to them both, adding that if he thought he detected the least sign of insincerity on the part of Oxtiern, 
he would request that the Count take her back to Norrköping.  
’Twas  about this same time that these two worthy souls, who were 
being too cruelly deceived, received some letters from Madame Scholtz, with whom they had parted on the best of terms. These letters begged 
them to excuse Herma n for his silence, and added that he was in the best 
of health. But, overwhelmed with the many problems attendant upon a 
settling of accounts —accounts which were proving somewhat difficult to 
balance, doubtless attributable to the grief wherewith Herman was afflicted at being separated from the person he loved —he was obliged to 
borrow the hand of his benefactress in order to send news of himself to 
his best friends. He besought them not to be worried, and reassured 
them that within a week Madame Scholtz her self would bring him to 
Stockholm, where he would prostrate himself at the feet of his beloved 
Ernestine.  
These missives succeeded in somewhat allaying her anxiety, but failed 
to reassure her completely …. 
“It takes but a few minutes to write a letter,” she  said. “Why did 
Herman not take the trouble to write himself? He must have recognized 
that I would have placed greater faith in a single word from his own hand than in twenty epistles written by a woman whom we have every 
reason to distrust.”  
Sanders tried  to set his daughter’s mind at ease; Ernestine, who was a 
trusting soul, yielded momentarily to the efforts her father was making to soothe her, only to feel the grave pangs of anxiety return immediately 
to sear her troubled soul.  
Meanwhile, the judicial i nquiry into Herman’s alleged crime was 
proceeding apace. The Senator, however, who had been in contact with the examining magistrates, had recommended that the case be treated 
with all possible discretion. He had demonstrated to them that if it 
became publicly known that the case were being investigated, Herman’s 
accomplices —those who were in possession of the money —would cross 
the border into a foreign country, if indeed they had not already done so, 
and because of the security measures they would have taken, ’twould  be 
impossible ever to recover the missing sum. This specious reasoning 
resulted in the magistrates conducting their inquiry with complete 
secrecy. Thus the entire proceeding took place in the very city where 
Ernestine and her father were living  without either the one or the other 
ever realizing it, and without it ever being possible that any news of it 
was brought to their attention.  
Such was more or less the state of affairs when the Colonel, for the 
first time in his life, found himself invite d to dinner at the Minister of 
War’s. Oxtiern was unable to escort him there personally; he had, he 
said, some twenty people himself that evening, but he gave Sanders to understand that he was responsible for that favor and, when he implied 
as much, urged the Colonel not to turn down the invitation. The 
Colonel had not the slightest desire to be remiss, although there was a 
question in his mind as to whether this perfidious dinner would really 
contribute to his happiness. He dressed as impeccably as he knew  how, 
commended his daughter to the care of Madame Plorman, and set off 
for the Minister’s mansion.  
He had not been gone an hour when Ernestine saw Madame Scholtz 
appear in her quarters. The greetings were brief.  
“Let us waste not a minute,” the merchant s aid to her, “but hasten 
together to Count Oxtiern’s. I have just brought Herman thither, and have come here as quickly as I could to inform you that your protector 
and your lover both await you with equal impatience.”  
“Herman?”  
“None other.”  
“Why did he no t accompany you here?”  
“He had some initial business with the Count, no doubt some 
obligation he felt compelled to pay him. The Senator, who loves you, is sacrificing himself for this young man; does Herman not owe him his 
eternal gratitude? …And would he not be remiss if he failed to express 
it?…But you see how both of them have sent me flying to fetch you…. 
’Tis the day when sacrifices are to be offered, Mademoiselle,” Madame 
Scholtz pursued, casting a hypocritical glance at Ernestine. “Come and see them c onsummated!”  
That miserable girl, torn between the urgent desire to fly to where 
they told her Herman was waiting and the fear of acting rashly in consenting to go to the Count’s while her father was away, could not make up her mind what to do. And as Madame Scholtz was still urging 
her to come, Ernestine thought it prudent in such a situation to ask 
Madame Plorman for her advice, and to request that she be 
accompanied either by the widow herself or by her cousin Sindersen. But 
Sindersen was not at home, and when she consulted Madame Plorman 
the widow replied by saying that the Senator’s house enjoyed too high a reputation for a girl to have the slightest fear about going there alone. 
She added that her niece must be familiar with the house, since she had 
been there several times with her father and, what was more, the 
moment Ernestine went there accompanied by a lady of the age and 
high station of Madame Scholtz, there was certainly no danger. She said 
further that she would be only too happy to join them we re it not for the fact that for the past ten years painful infirmities of a most horrible 
nature had restricted her to the confines of her own home, from which it 
had been impossible to venture forth into public.  
“But you are running no risk at all, my dea r niece,” Madame Plorman 
went on. “Go where you wish without feeling the slightest qualm. I shall 
inform the Colonel the moment he returns, so that he may come and 
fetch you straightway.”  
Ernestine, delighted to hear advice which agreed so completely with 
her own views, wasted no time climbing into Madame Scholtz’s carriage, and they soon arrived at the Senator’s house, to find him awaiting their arrival at the door of his mansion.  
“Come hither, my charming Ernestine,” he said, offering her his 
hand, “come and revel in your triumph, enjoy my sacrifice and that of Madame Scholtz, come and prove to yourself that in the souls of 
sensitive creatures the virtue of generosity perforce must prevail over any 
other sentiment ….” 
Ernestine could no longer control herse lf; her heart was pounding 
with impatience, and if the anticipation of happiness made her more 
beautiful, then she was doubtless at this moment more worthy than ever 
to receive the homage of the entire universe…. And yet there were 
certain things that alar med her and acted as a damper upon the sweet 
emotion wherewith she was consumed. Although it was still broad 
daylight, not a single valet was to be seen anywhere in the house, 
wherein a lugubrious silence reigned. Not a word was to be heard, and as 
she mov ed from room to room the doors closed carefully behind her. 
The deeper they penetrated into the house, the darker it grew, and these 
precautionary measures so terrified Ernestine that she was on the verge 
of fainting by the time they reached the room where in she was to be received. She at length arrived in this chamber, a rather spacious salon 
which overlooked the public square. But the windows which looked 
upon the square were tightly closed; only one of the rear windows of the 
room was slightly ajar, thro ugh which a few rays of sunlight filtered 
through the lowered blinds, and when Ernestine entered the room it was 
completely empty. The poor girl was scarcely breathing: realizing none 
the less that her safety depended upon her courage, she maintained her sang-froid and said:  
“Monsieur, what is the meaning of this solitude, and of this dreadful 
silence? …The doors which are carefully closed behind us, these windows 
closely shuttered so that scarcely a ray of light can get through them: all 
these measures have  been taken with the express purpose of frightening 
me: where is Herman?”  
“Sit down, Ernestine,” said the Senator, taking a seat between her and 
Madame Scholtz. “Remain calm and listen to what I have to say. A great 
many things have happened, my dear girl,  since you left Norrköping. 
The man to whom you have given your heart has unfortunately proven 
that he is unworthy of your gift.”  
“O Merciful Heaven! You frighten me !” 
“Your Herman is a scoundrel, Ernestine. What remains to be 
determined is whether you are in any way involved in the theft of a 
considerable sum of money which he stole from Madame Scholtz. You 
are under suspicion.”  
“Count,” said Ernestine, getting to her feet with as much nobility as 
steadfastness of purpose, “your artifice is discovered. I c an see that I have 
acted rashly…I am as good as lost …I have fallen into the hands of my 
two worst enemies …I am completely at the mercy of those who have 
plotted my destruction ….” And, falling to her knees: “Almighty God,” she cried out, “I have now no long er anyone but Thee as my protector; 
do not, I beseech Thee, abandon innocence to the dangerous hands of 
crime and cunning!”  
“Ernestine,” said Madame Scholtz, raising her from her kneeling 
position and forcing her in spite of herself into the same chair in which 
she had been sitting,” ’tis  not a question of praying here to God, ’tis a 
question of replying. The Senator is in no wise misrepresenting the 
matter to you. Your Herman has stolen a hundred thousand ducats from 
me, and he was within an ace of coming to fetch you away when, 
fortunately, the entire affair was brought to light. Herman was arrested, but the money has still not been found, and he steadfastly denies having 
misappropriated the funds. ’Tis  this which has led us to believe that the 
money is al ready in your hands. Meanwhile the whole affair is shaping 
up badly: there are several witnesses who have testified against him; 
several citizens of Norrköping have admitted having seen him leave my 
house under cover of night carrying some sacks beneath hi s coat. The 
crime has been proven beyond the shadow of a doubt, and your lover is 
now in the hands of justice.”  
Ernestine —Herman guilty! Herman suspected of having committed a 
crime! And you believed it, Monsieur? …You allowed yourself to believe 
it? 
The Co unt—Ernestine, we have neither the time to discuss this matter 
nor the time to think of anything save remedying the situation as quickly as possible. Rather than mention it to you to no purpose or grieve you 
senselessly, I wished to have the entire story before resorting to the 
scheme wherein you see me involved today. At present you are merely 
under the cloud of suspicion, ’tis  for this reason I wished to spare you the 
humiliations of imprisonment. I owed it to your father, and to you, and I have fulfilled  that obligation. But as for Herman, he is guilty …. No, my 
dear girl, ’tis even worse than that, and I tell you this with fear and 
trembling: he has been sentenced …. 
Ernestine  (blanching) —Sentenced! …Herman sentenced! …The very 
paragon of innocence I …O Merci ful Heaven!  
“The whole affair can be put right, Ernestine,” the Senator hastened 
to resume, supporting her in his arms, “the whole affair can be put right, 
I say…. All I ask is that you resist my passion no longer; grant me, here 
and now, the favors I dema nd of you, and I shall hasten directly to the 
magistrates …. They are within a stone’s throw of here,” he said, 
pointing to the public square, “they are assembled to conclude this cruel 
affair …. I shall fly out there to them …I shall take them the hundred 
thousand ducats and testify that the error was mine, whilst Madame 
Scholtz will withdraw all complaints against him and at the same time 
swear that ’twas  but an error in the bookkeeping due to the 
reconciliation of accounts between Herman and herself, wherei n the 
missing sum was posted twice. In one word, I shall save your lover …and 
that is not all: I shall furthermore keep the promise I made you, and 
within a week I shall see to it that you become his wife …. Make up your 
mind, Ernestine, and above all waste not a moment, for time is 
precious …. Bear in mind the sum I shall be sacrificing …the crime 
whereof you may stand accused …the dreadful situation of Herman…the 
happiness which at last will be yours, if only you consent to satisfy my desire.”  
Ernestine —I, you  would have me consent to such infamies! You 
would have me redeem, at such a price, a crime whereof neither Herman nor I were ever guilty!  The Count —Ernestine, you are in my power; the thing you fear can 
come to pass without your surrender. I am therefore doing more for you 
than I should by rendering to you him whom you love, upon condition 
you grant me a favor I can obtain without that clause …. Time is of the 
essence. In one hour ’twill  be too late …in one hour Herman will be 
dead, and you will not be the less dishonored …. Reflect well upon this: 
your refusal will result in your lover’s death, without having saved your modesty, whilst the sacrifice of that selfsame modesty —the high regard 
in which ’tis  held is imaginary—will result in the reprieve of him you 
hold so dear —what am I saying? —will straightway restore him to your 
waiting arms …. Credulous and falsely virtuous girl …if you hesitate 
between two such choices, you were guilty of a reprehensible weakness, nay, worse yet, of a most certain crime. By grant ing what I ask, you will 
lose naught but an illusory asset …. By refusing, you will be guilty of 
sending a man to his death, and that man whom you will have sacrificed is the one you love most in the world …. Make up your mind, Ernestine, 
make up your mind; I shall give you no more than five minutes.  
Ernestine —I have already made up my mind, Monsieur. ’Tis  out of 
the question to commit one crime in order to prevent another. I know my betrothed well enough to be certain he would prefer his own death to 
my dish onor, all the more so because he would not marry me after I had 
been debased. Were I to consent to your demands, therefore, I would 
render myself guilty without making him any happier, and my guilt would not have saved him, since he assuredly would not sur vive such an 
excess of horror and calumny. Therefore let me leave, Monsieur, and 
refrain from making yourself more criminal than I suspect you already to 
be…. I shall go and die beside my lover; I shall share his dreadful fate, but at least I shall die wor thy of him, and I prefer to die virtuous than to 
live in ignominy …. 
Then the Count became furious …. 
“You expect to leave this house!” he said, fuming with rage and love, 
“you expect to escape me before I have satisfied my desire! ’Tis  an empty 
hope; do not  delude yourself, you wild creature …. Thunderbolts will 
strike the earth and wipe it out before I shall ever set you free, before you 
have quenched the flame wherewith I am devoured,” he said, taking the 
poor girl in his arms …. 
Ernestine tried to defend he rself…but in vain…. Oxtiern was a 
madman, whose wild schemes make one’s blood run cold …. 
“Wait!” said Madame Scholtz, “wait one moment. Perhaps her 
reluctance stems from her doubts.”  
“Perhaps it does,” said the Senator, “we must convince her.”  
And taking E rnestine by the hand, he dragged her toward the 
windows which looked out onto the public square, and hurriedly opened 
the blinds.  
“There, treacherous creature,” he said to her, “see your Herman and 
his gallows.”  
And indeed, there on the square stood the bloody theater, and poor 
Herman, on the threshold of losing his life thereon, appeared with a confessor at the foot of the scaffold. Ernestine recognized him …she 
attempted to cry out …tried to throw herself out the window… she felt 
her entire body growing weak …all her senses began to fail her, and she 
collapsed.  
At this point Oxtiern rushed to accomplish his perfidious designs …. 
He seized the poor unconscious creature and, without being the least bit frightened by the condition she was in, he dared to consummat e his crime, he dared utilize, to satisfy his uncontrollable rage, that respectable 
creature whom Heaven had abandoned and unjustly allowed to be 
subjected to the most horrible frenzy of his passion. Ernestine was 
dishonored without ever recovering consciousness; at the same moment, Oxtiern’s unfortunate rival submitted to the blade of justice: Herman 
was no more.  
After they had ministered to her, Ernestine at length opened her eyes. 
The first word she uttered was Herman; her first wish was for a 
dagger …. S he rose to her feet, went back to that terrible window which 
was still partly open, and tried to cast herself out of it, but they 
restrained her bodily. She asked for her lover, was told that he was alive 
no longer and that she alone was responsible for hi s death …. She 
shuddered…her mind became unhinged …disjointed phrases tumbled 
from her lips …sobs punctuated the words …’twas  only the tears which 
refused to flow…. Only after all this did she perceive that she had just 
been made Oxtiern’s victim …she cast a fu rious look at him.  
“So ’tis you, scoundrel,” she said, “ ’tis you who in one fell swoop have 
ravished my honor and deprived me of my lover!”  
“Ernestine, there is no wrong that cannot be made right,” said the 
Count.  
“Of that I am sure,” said Ernestine, “and no doubt it will. And now 
am I free to go? Has your rage been appeased?”  
“Senator!” cried Madame Scholtz, “do not let this girl leave here …. 
She will be the undoing of us both What do we care about this creature’s life? Let us straightway cut it short and  spend the rest of our days in 
peace.”  
“No,” said the Count. “Ernestine realizes that to lodge a complaint 
against us would serve no purpose. She has lost her betrothed, but she can still see to it that her father’s fortune is made. Let her not breathe a 
word, and happiness can still be hers.”  
“Complaints, Senator, I lodge complaints? …Madame suspects that I 
might be tempted to institute an action against you? No, no…There are certain kinds of offenses for which a woman does not lodge any 
complaint …she cannot without debasing herself, and the avowals, which 
would be all too embarrassing to her, would offend her modesty far more 
than the redress she would receive to satisfy her revenge were ever worth. 
Let me go, Senator, let me leave this place, and you may c ount upon my 
discretion.”  
“Ernestine, I intend to let you go…. And let me remind you once 
again: your fate is in your own hands.”  
“I know that full well,” responded Ernestine proudly, “ ’tis  they will 
insure it.”  
“How unwise of you!” Madame Scholtz exclaim ed. “Oh! Count, I 
would never have agreed to be your accomplice had I suspected you were 
capable of such weakness!”  
“Ernestine will not betray us,” said the Count. “She knows I love her 
still…. She knows that the reward for her silence can be marriage.”  
“Ah! have no fear, have no fear,” said Ernestine, getting into the 
carriage which awaited her. “I care far too much about redeeming my honor to resort to such base methods …. You will be pleased by those I 
choose, my dear Count. They will do honor to us both.  Adieu.”  
Ernestine’s carriage started off…. Her way home took her through the 
middle of the public square whereon her lover had just perished; she had 
to fight her way through the crowd which had just finished feasting its 
eyes upon the terrible spectacle.  Her courage alone sustained her; her 
resolution lent her strength, and at last she arrived home.  Her father returned at the same moment; Oxtiern had artfully 
arranged for the Colonel to be detained the length of time required for 
the consummation of his c rime…. He saw his daughter pale and 
distraught …her hair in disarray; but she was none the less dry- eyed, her 
countenance was proud, and her words firm.  
“May I speak to you privately, Father?” she said. “I have something I 
must tell you.”  
“Daughter, you frighten me …. What has happened? You have been 
out while I was away …. I have heard rumors concerning the execution of 
a young man from Norrköping. I hurried home in a state of deep 
distress …greatly disturbed. Tell me all you know …the icy hand of death 
grips m y heart.”  
“Listen to me, Father …restrain your tears” (and, casting herself into 
the Colonel’s arms): “We were not born to know happiness, Father. 
There are certain persons whom Nature creates solely to drift from one 
misfortune to the next throughout the s hort span of their days here on 
earth. Not all of us can hope to experience an equal share of happiness; 
on this score we must submit to the will of Heaven. But at least you still 
have your daughter, she will be a source of help to you in your old age, a 
rod and staff to comfort you…. The poor young man from Norrköping 
about whom you have just heard is none other than Herman; he has just perished on the gallows before my very eyes …. Yes, Father, before my 
eyes…. They wanted me to witness the execution…and I  did. Herman 
died the victim of Madame Scholtz’s insane jealousy and Oxtiern’s mad rage…. ’Tis not all I have to tell, Father: would that the loss of my lover 
were all I had to discover to you; but, alas, I have suffered an even crueler 
one…. Your daughter  has been returned to you dishonored …Oxtiern …while one of his victims was being sacrificed 
beneath the executioner’s blade, was despoiling the other.”  
Sanders, in a state of fury, rose to his feet:  
“I have heard enough,” he said. “My duty is clear. The son  of that 
worthy friend of Charles XII needs no one to tell him how to deal with a 
traitor. Within the hour either I shall be dead or your honor will be 
avenged.”  
“No, Father, I beseech you,” said Ernestine, restraining the Colonel 
from leaving. “I demand, in the name of all you hold most dear, that you not seek this revenge yourself. If I had the misfortune to lose you, can you imagine the horror of my fate? Left alone, with no one to look to for 
support …an easy mark for the foul schemes of these monsters; do you 
think they would waste any time sacrificing me in turn?…You must live 
for me, Father, for your dear daughter who, in the depths of her despair, 
has no one but you to turn to for help or consolation…has only your 
hands wherewith to wipe away her tear s…. Listen to my plan; it requires 
but a minor sacrifice, which may even prove to be superfluous if my 
cousin Sindersen is a man of feeling. The fear that my aunt may show a 
preference for me in her will is the sole reason for the slight coolness that 
has existed between us. I intend to dispel his fears and sign a statement 
renouncing my share of her inheritance; I shall win him over to our 
cause. He is young, he is courageous, he is a soldier like yourself. He will go and find Oxtiern and will cleanse my wrong with the blood of this 
traitor. And as we demand satisfaction, if he succumbs I shall no longer 
restrain your arm, and you in your turn will go seek out the Senator and 
avenge at once both your daughter’s honor and the death of him she 
loved. By so do ing, the scoundrel who deceived me will have two enemies against him rather than one; and for one such as he, the more 
enemies the better!”  
“But Daughter, Sindersen is very young for a foe such as Oxtiern.”  
“Have no fears, Father, traitors are always cowar ds, victory will not be 
difficult …. Ah! may it be given to me to see him thus vanquished! …In 
any case, I demand that this plan be followed…you owe it to me, Father …the wrong I have suffered gives me that right. I beseech you to 
grant me this one request …. ’Tis at your feet I request it.”  
“If ’tis what you want, then I consent to it,” said the Colonel, helping 
his daughter to her feet, “and the argument that makes me yield to your wishes is the certainty of increasing the number of enemies, as you say, 
arrayed against the person who dishonored you.”  
Ernestine kissed her father and hurried off to find her cousin. She 
returned in a short time.  
“Sindersen agrees and is ready, Father,” she said to the Colonel. “But 
because of his aunt he most earnestly entreats y ou not to breathe a word 
of this to Madame Plorman, who could never forgive herself for having 
advised me to go to the Count’s house, which she did in all good faith. 
Sindersen is therefore of the opinion that all this must be kept from 
Madame Plorman; he will avoid meeting you till the affair is concluded, 
and you will do the same with him.”  
“Agreed,” said the Colonel, “let him fly forth and seek revenge …I 
shall be but a step or two behind….”  
All grew calm …. Ernestine retired for the night, apparently quit e 
calm. The following morning at an early hour Count Oxtiern received a 
letter in an unknown hand which consisted merely of the following 
words:  A heinous crime cannot be committed with impunity; an odious 
injustice cannot go unavenged; a decent girl canno t be dishonored 
without the tempter, or him who is responsible for the crime, paying with his life. At ten o’clock tonight an officer dressed in a red uniform will be strolling near the port, a sword beneath his arm, awaiting 
your arrival. If you fail to m eet him there, this same officer will come 
to your house the following day and there will blow your brains out.  
The letter was delivered by a servant out of livery, and since he had 
been instructed to return with a reply, he came back with this same note, 
on the back of which was penned simply these four words: I shall be there.  
But the false -hearted Oxtiern was too intrigued to learn what had 
transpired at Madame Plorman’s house since Ernestine’s return not to have employed every means his fortune could co mmand to obtain that 
information. He learned who the officer dressed in red was to be; he 
learned too that the Colonel had instructed his personal valet to prepare 
for him an English uniform, as he intended to don a disguise to follow 
him to whom the task of avenging his daughter had been entrusted, so 
that the avenger would not recognize him. And, in the unlikely event 
that he were defeated in the duel, he, the Colonel, would take up the 
cudgels on the spot. ’Twas  more than enough for Oxtiern to use in ord er 
to devise a new and terrible plot.  
Night fell, and ’twas  an unusually dark one; Ernestine sent word to 
her father that Sindersen would leave in an hour and, given her state of 
distress, asked his permission to retire for the night. The Colonel, only 
too pleased to be alone, bid his daughter good night and made 
preparations to follow him who had sworn to avenge her honor. He left the house …. He was unaware of the uniform Sindersen would be 
wearing. Ernestine had not showed him the challenge; in order to maintain the aura of secrecy the young man had requested, and in order 
not to arouse his daughter’s suspicions, he had refrained from asking any 
questions. He was not concerned about the details; he knew where the 
duel was scheduled to take place, and he he aded toward the port, certain 
that he would have no difficulty in recognizing his nephew. He arrived 
at the appointed spot and, seeing no one appear, kept on walking. Just 
then a stranger accosted him, bearing no weapons, and with his hat held low. 
“Monsie ur,” said this man to him, “are you not Colonel Sanders?”  
“I am.”  
“Then prepare to defend yourself. Sindersen has betrayed you, he has 
no intention of engaging the Count in a duel. But this last -named 
gentleman is not far off, and ’tis  against you alone he  intends to duel.”  
“God be praised !” said the Colonel with a shout of joy, “nothing could 
please me more.”  
“One word of caution, if you don’t mind, Monsieur,” resumed the 
stranger. “Do not say a word; this spot is not very safe. The Senator has 
many friend s. The slightest sound from you might bring them running 
to stop the duel …. He prefers that it not be stopped, and desires to offer 
you full satisfaction…. Therefore say nothing and launch an all- out 
assault upon the officer dressed in red whom you will se e advancing 
toward you from that direction.”  
“Good,” said the Colonel, “and now withdraw with all dispatch. I am 
burning to cross swords ….” 
The stranger withdrew, Sanders circled twice again the designated site 
until at last he saw lurking in the shadows a n officer dressed in red who 
was walking proudly toward him. He had no doubt ’twas  Oxtiern, and 
Sanders lunged at him with drawn sword, saying not a word for fear of being separated. The officer put up a stout defense —also without 
uttering a sound —and disp layed exceptional bravery. At length his valor 
yielded to the Colonel’s vigorous assaults, and the poor creature fell, 
mortally wounded, to the dust. At that moment a cry escaped the lips of the Colonel’s opponent —’twas  a woman’s cry, a baleful cry that pi erced 
the Colonel’s heart …. He approached the fallen fighter …and perceived 
features far different from the masculine traits of the person he thought he was dueling …. Merciful Heaven! …’Twas  his own daughter …’twas  
she, brave Ernestine, who wished to avenge h er own honor or die in the 
attempt and who, bathed in her own blood, lay dying, a victim of her father’s sword.  
“O dreadful day for me!” the Colonel cried…. “Ernestine, ’tis  you I 
have slain! What a horrible mistake !…Who is responsible for it? …” 
“Father,” said Ernestine in a weak voice, clasping the Colonel in her 
arms, “I did not recognize you. Forgive me, Father, for having taken arms against you. Can you forgive me?”  
“Great God! when ’tis my hand has brought you to death’s door! O 
my dear soul, with how many envenomed blows does Heaven intend to 
strike us at once?”  
“This whole scheme is once again the handiwork of perfidious 
Oxtiern…. A stranger accosted me and, saying he was by Oxtiern 
dispatched, told me to remain completely silent, in order that the du el 
not be stopped. He further advised me that, upon seeing a man dressed 
in the uniform you are wearing, I should draw my sword and attack, for 
’twould  be the Count …. I believed his words; it was an act of purest 
perfidy! …I am dying …but at least I have the  comfort of dying in your 
arms, ’tis the gentlest, sweetest death I could hope to have after all the afflictions wherewith I have just been overwhelmed. Embrace me, 
Father, and receive your poor Ernestine’s last farewell.”  
With these words the ill -fated gi rl breathed her last. Sanders bathed 
her with his tears …. But the desire for revenge helps allay sorrow’s 
hurt…. He left his daughter’s blood -stained body to fly and seek redress 
from the law …determined to die or bring Oxtiern to justice …. ’Tis only 
in a c ourt of law he decided he could hope to make his appeal…. To deal 
further with a villain of Oxtiern’s stature was out of the question: the 
Count would sooner have him murdered than consent to cross swords 
with him in equal combat. Still covered with his daughter’s blood, the Colonel prostrated himself before the magistrates, discovered to them 
the frightful chain of circumstances wherewith he had been beset and 
revealed the full extent of the Count’s infamies …. They were moved by 
his recital, concerned by w hat he said; nor did he fail above all to prove 
to them how complete, in the case of Herman, had been the miscarriage of justice, because of the stratagems of the same traitor against whom he was lodging his complaint …. He was promised retribution.  
Despite  the immense influence the Senator prided himself upon 
enjoying, he was arrested that same night. Believing himself as safe as he 
was certain of the outcome of his criminal designs —or perhaps having 
been wrongly informed by his spies —he was lying peacefully coupled in 
the arms of Madame Scholtz, celebrating with her the ghastly manner in which they had taken their revenge. They were both taken away and cast 
into prison. The judicial inquiry was held with utter rigor …no shadow 
of influence was allowed to int rude upon it. The two guilty parties 
contradicted each other’s testimony …the one and the other mutually 
convicted themselves …. The memory of Herman was rehabilitated. 
Madame Scholtz was sentenced to pay for the horror of her crimes on the selfsame gallows whereon she had caused the innocent Herman to 
perish.  
The Senator was sentenced to suffer the same fate. But the King 
tempered the harsh verdict by pardoning him, to the extent of banishing 
the Count for life to the depths of the mines.  
From the guilty par ties’ possessions, the King offered the Colonel a 
pension of ten thousand ducats, and raised him to the rank of General in his service. But Sanders refused both offers.  
“Sire,” he said to the monarch, “you are too generous. For if these 
favors are being gr anted as a reward for my services to the Crown, then 
they are far too magnanimous, I do not deserve them …. And if they are 
offered as payment for the losses I have suffered, they are insufficient. Sire, the wounds inflicted upon one’s heart cannot be heale d either with 
gold or by the bestowal of honors …. I beseech therefore Your Majesty to 
grant me a certain time alone with my despair. In a short while I shall solicit from Your Highness the only favor that may seem befitting to me.” 
“This then, Monsieur,” F alkeneim broke in, “is the essence of the 
story you asked me to relate. I only regret that we are under the 
obligation to see this Oxtiern again; he can only be an object of horror in 
your eyes.”  
“No one is more understanding than I, Monsieur,” I replied, “when 
’tis a question of the errors into which we are led by our constitutions. I 
look upon evildoers, in the midst of honest and upright people, as those 
irregularities which Nature mingles in amongst the beauties wherewith 
she adorns the universe. But th is man Oxtiern you have described, and 
especially Madame Scholtz, abuse the right which men’s weaknesses 
must obtain from philosophers. ’Tis  impossible that crime be carried to any greater lengths. In the conduct of the one as of the other, there are 
acts which make one’s blood run cold. To ravish that hapless girl while 
her lover is being put to the sword …then to have her murdered by her 
own father …these are subtle refinements of horror which cause one to 
be ashamed to be a man, when one is unfortunate enough to have to 
share this title with such monstrous villains.”  
Scarcely had I uttered these words than Oxtiern appeared, bearing his 
letter. He was too clever and perceptive a man not to detect upon my 
face that I had just been made privy to his adventures …. He looked at 
me. 
“Monsieur,” he said, in French, “have pity upon me. Immense 
wealth …a powerful family …influence: these are the sirens who lured me 
to my doom. Educated by misfortune, I have learned the meaning of 
remorse, and I can now live among my fel low men without terrifying or 
harming them.”  
These words from the ill -fated Count were accompanied by a flow of 
tears, which I could not bring myself to share. My guide took his letter, 
repeated his offer to be of service, and we were preparing to leave wh en 
we saw a crowd of people in the street moving toward us …. We stopped; 
Oxtiern was still with us. Slowly we were able to distinguish among the crowd two men who were conversing heatedly and who, upon seeing us, 
straightway headed in our direction. Oxtier n recognized both 
personages.  
“O Heaven!” he exclaimed, “what is this? …Colonel Sanders brought 
hither by the director of the mine! …Yes, ’tis our pastor coming, bringing 
the Colonel toward us …. What I you mean this implacable enemy has 
come to find me even unto the bowels of the earth! …Does this mean my 
cruel punishment does not suffice to satisfy him !…” Oxtiern was still giving utterance to these thoughts when the Colonel 
accosted him with these words, as soon as he had reached his side:  
“You are free, Mons ieur,” he said to him, “and ’tis  to the man in the 
world whom you have most grievously offended that your pardon is 
due…. Here it is, Senator, from my own hand. The King offered me 
commissions, honors; I refused them all. The only favor I requested was your freedom, and my request has been granted. You are free to follow me.” 
“O most generous of men!” Oxtiern cried, “is it possible? …I, 
free?…and free thanks to you? …you who, were you to take my life, 
would still not punish me as I deserve to be?”  
“I was cert ain that such would be your reaction,” said the Colonel. 
“That is why I imagined there would no longer be any risk involved in restoring to you a gift which ’twould  be impossible that you further 
abuse …. Moreover, does your suffering in any wise ease my own? Can 
your sorrows make me happy? Can your detention pay for the blood your barbarous acts have spilled? If I deemed ’twere  so, I would be as cruel as 
you, and as unjust. Does casting a man into prison compensate society 
for the wrongs he has done it? …Suc h a man must be set free, if amends 
are to be made, and if he is freed there is none who would fail to make 
them, there is not a single man alive who would not prefer doing good to 
the necessity of living in chains. When, amongst some nations, 
despotism de nies this truth or when, amongst others, the rigor of the law 
prevents it, the heart of the honest man confirms it …. Go then, Count, 
leave these depths; I say it again, you are a free man ….” 
Oxtiern tried to embrace his benefactor.  
“Monsieur,” Sanders said  to him coldly, pushing him away. “Save your 
gratitude; nor do I want you to be grateful to me for something I have done for myself alone …. Let us leave this place forthwith; I am more 
eager than you to see you beyond the confines of this mine, in order to 
explain everything to you.”  
Sanders, seeing us with Oxtiern and having learned who we were, 
invited us to ascend to the surface with him and the Count; we accepted. 
Oxtiern went with the Colonel to complete certain formalities required 
before he could be set free; our sidearms were returned to us, and we 
ascended to the surface.  
“Gentlemen,” Sanders said to us as soon as we were outside, “I would 
be grateful if you would act as my witnesses in what yet remains for me to discover to Count Oxtiern. You have seen that I did not tell him 
everything back there in the mine; there were too many bystanders ….” 
And as we were still walking while we talked, we soon found ourselves 
in the vicinity of a hedge which completely concealed us from any prying 
eyes. Then the Colonel seized the Count by the collar:  
“Senator,” he said to him …. “I expect you now to give me satisfaction; 
I trust you are brave enough not to refuse me this demand and intelligent enough to realize that the most cogent reason I had for acting 
in this manner was the hope of slitting your throat or having mine slit by 
you.”  
Falkeneim attempted to intervene and separate the two opponents.  
“Monsieur,” the Colonel said to him testily, “you are not unaware of 
the outrages I have suffered at the hand of this man. My dear departed 
daughter’s spirit cries out for blood: one of us will not leave this spot 
alive. Gustavus is privy to the plan; when he granted me the privilege of 
setting this wretch free, he voiced no objections to it. Therefore, 
Monsieur, I beg you not to interfere.”  And the Colonel, removing his coat, straightway drew his sword …. 
Oxtiern drew his as well, but scarcely had they crossed swords than the 
Count, seizing the end of his own and taking the point of the Colonel’s 
in his left hand, offered him the handle of his weapon and, dropping to one knee:  
“Gentlemen,” he said, glancing at us, “I ask you both to be my 
witnesses; I want you to know that I do not deserve the honor of fighting a duel with this worthy man, but that I place my life in his 
hands, and ask only that he take it from me …. Here is my sword, 
Colonel, take it, ’tis  yours. And here is my heart; thrust your own sword 
into it, I shall help direct it to its mark. Do not hesitate; ’tis  not a request 
I make, but a demand. Deliver this eart h forthwith of a monster who has 
too long besoiled it.”  
Taken aback by Oxtiern’s movement, Sanders cried out to him to 
defend himself.  
“I shall not, and if you refuse to put this sword I am now holding to 
use,” Oxtiern firmly declared, directing the tip of Sanders’ sword to his 
bare breast, “if you refuse to use this sword to put an end to all my days, 
I swear to you, Colonel, that I shall use it to gouge out my eyes.”  
“Count, blood must be shed …it must, I say, blood must be shed.”  
“I know,” said Oxtiern, “ and ’tis for this reason I bare my breast to 
you. Thrust your sword into it …’tis  from this breast alone that blood 
must flow.”  
“But ’tis not thuswise I wish to act,” Sanders responded, still trying to 
wrest his sword from Oxtiern’s grasp, “but upon the fie ld of honor I wish 
to punish you for all your villainies.”  “I am unworthy to meet you on any field of honor, Colonel Sanders,” 
Oxtiern retorted, “and since you refuse to satisfy your honor as ’tis  only 
meet you should, I shall therefore spare you the trouble ….” 
So saying, he fell upon the Colonel’s sword, which he was still 
gripping in his hand, and from his entrails there spurted a stream of 
blood. But the Colonel, quickly withdrawing his sword:  
“’Tis enough, Count,” he exclaimed …. “Your blood has been she d, my 
honor is appeased …. May Heaven complete your punishment; I have no 
desire to act as your executioner.”  
“Let us then embrace, Monsieur,” said Oxtiern, who was losing 
considerable blood.  
“No,” said Sanders. “I can forgive you for your crimes, but ask n ot that 
I be your friend.”  
We hastened to bind the Count’s wound, the kindhearted Sanders 
lending a hand.  
“Now go,” he then said to the Senator. “Go and take advantage of the 
freedom I have rendered you. Try, if ’tis  possible for you, to atone by a 
few good deeds for all the crimes whereof you have been guilty. 
Otherwise I shall spread the word throughout the length and breadth of 
Sweden of the crime whereof I was guilty in setting free a monster of 
which the country had already been delivered. Gentlemen,” Sanders 
went on, turning to Falkeneim and me, “I have provided for all 
contingencies; the carriage which is waiting at the inn where we are now 
going was brought thither for Oxtiern alone, but it can take you both as 
well. My horses await me elsewhere; I b id you adieu. I ask that you 
swear to me by all that is holy that you will give the King a fair account 
of what you have just seen.”  Oxtiern wanted once again to cast himself into the arms of his 
liberator; he begged him to reconsider and be friends, and b esought him 
to come and share both his dwelling and his fortune.  
“Monsieur,” said the Colonel, pushing him away a second time, “I 
have already told you I cannot accept from you either your friendship or 
your gifts. But what I still demand from you is virtue; do not make me 
regret what I have done …. You tell me that you want to console me for 
the sorrows I have known; the surest method of doing so is to alter your 
conduct. In my retreat, each time I hear tell of a good deed you have 
done, a little of the sor row wherewith my soul is graven will perhaps be 
effaced. If you resume your infamous ways, every crime you commit will 
conjure before my eyes the image of her who, through your perfidious 
plot, died by my hand, and you will plunge me into despair. Adieu…’t is 
time to take leave, Oxtiern. And may we never meet again ….” 
Upon these words, the Colonel turned and left …. Oxtiern, in tears, 
made as if to follow him, scarce able to move from his wound; we restrained him and practically carried him, for he was nigh t o 
unconscious, to the waiting carriage, which soon brought us to 
Stockholm.  
The poor man hovered for a month between life and death; at the end 
of this period, he invited us to accompany him to see the King, who 
asked us for a detailed account of all that had transpired.  
“Oxtiern,” said Gustavus to the Senator, “you see how crime 
humiliates man, and how it debases him …. Your rank …your 
wealth …your noble birth, all gave you a higher station in life than 
Sanders. But his virtue alone places him above you, on a  station you will 
never attain. Take full advantage of the great favor he has done you, Oxtiern, a favor to which I gave my prior consent …. After a lesson such as this, resolve either to mete out your own punishment before word 
reaches me of any new crimes  you commit or to make certain you will 
never again stoop so low as to commit any.”  
The Count cast himself at the feet of his sovereign and swore to him 
that his conduct would henceforth be irreproachable.  
He was as good as his word: a thousand good deeds,  one more 
magnanimous and edifying than the other, atoned for his former errors in the eyes of all Sweden. And his example demonstrated to that wise 
nation that ’tis  not always by the paths of tyranny, or through ghastly 
vengeance, that man is restrained from evil or brought back to the path 
of good.  
Sanders had returned to Norrköping, and there he ended his career, 
leading a solitary life burdened daily by the tears he shed over the loss of his unfortunate and ill -fated daughter, a life cheered by naught but the 
news received each day filled with encomiums concerning him whose chains he had broken.  
“O Virtue,” he would sometimes exclaim, “perhaps ’twas  essential that 
all these things happen thus in order to bring Oxtiern back to thy 
temple! If that be true,  then my heart takes comfort in the thought, for I 
alone have suffered from the crimes he committed, whilst his good deeds 
redound to the benefit of all.”  
   
Bibliography 
I. WORKS PUBLISHED DURING THE AUTHOR’S 
LIFETIME  
LITERARY  WORKS  
1. Justine, ou les Malhe urs de la Vertu. En Hollande, Chez les Libraires 
associés [Paris, Girouard], 1791. Two volumes, 8vo. Frontispiece by 
Chéry. During Sade’s lifetime, there were six further printings 
between the initial publication and 1801. Sade’s re -arrest that year 
put an  end to the reprintings. These subsequent editions were:  
1) En Hollande  [Paris, Girouard], 1791. Two volumes, 12mo. 
Certain copies of this edition include twelve erotic engravings.  
2) À Londres  [Paris, Cazin], 1792. Two volumes, 18mo. Frontispiece 
and five engra vings.  
3) Troisième  [fourth] édition corrigée et augmentée. Philadelphie [Paris], 
1794. Two volumes, 18mo. Frontispiece and five engravings.  
4) À Londres  [Paris], 1797. Four volumes, 18mo. Further augmented 
edition. Six erotic engravings.  5) En Hollande  [Paris], 1800. Four volumes, 16mo. Presented as the 
Troisième édition corrigée et augmentée,  this is actually a reprint of 
the original edition.  
6) En Hollande  [Paris], 1801. Four volumes, 16mo. Also presented as 
the Troisième édition corrigée et augmentée,  this was a r eprinting of 
the 1800 edition.1 
2. Aline et Valcour, ou le Roman philosophique. Écrit à la Bastille un an 
avant la Révolution de France. Orné de quatorze gravures. Par le citoyen 
S***. À Paris, chez Girouard, Libraire, rue du Bout -du-Monde, nº 47, 
1793.  Eight  volumes, 18mo.  
There are actually three different editions of this work, bearing different dates and, in some instances, containing sixteen rather than 
twelve engravings. Sade announced
2 the book would appear at Easter 
of 1791, but the instability of the times and the death of Girouard 
beneath the guillotine in 1794 kept the book from appearing until 
1795, which date should be taken as the date of reference of the original edition.  
3. La Philosophie dans le boudoir. Ouvrage posthume de l’auteur de “Justine.” À Londres, aux dépens de la Compagnie, MDCCXCV.  Two 
volumes, 18mo. Frontispiece and four erotic engravings.  
4. La Nouvelle Justine, ou les Malheurs de la Vertu. Ouvrage orné d’un 
frontispice et de quarante sujets gravés avec soin. En Hollande  [Paris], 
1797. F our volumes, 18mo. These four volumes comprise the first 
1 See the “ Bibliographic des Œuvres de Sade ” drawn up by Robert Valençay in  Les 
Infortunes de la Vertu , Paris, Les Éditions du Point du Jour, 1946.  
2 In a letter of March 6, 1791.                                           part of the definitive edition of this work, of which the second part, 
in six volumes, bears the title:  
5. La Nouvelle Justine, ou les Malheurs de la Vertu, suivie de l’Histoire de 
Juliette, sa soeur [o u les Prospérités du vice.] Ouvrage orné d’un frontispice 
et de cent sujets gravés avec soin. En Hollande  [Paris], 1797.  
6. Oxtiern, ou les malheurs du libertinage, drame en trois actes et en prose 
par D. -A.-F. S. Représenté au Théâtre Molière, à Paris, en 17 91; et à 
Versailles, sur celui de la Société Dramatique, le 22 frimaire, l’an 8 de la 
République. À Versailles, chez Blaizot, Libraire, rue Satory. An huitième  
[1800]. One volume, 8vo, 48 pages.  
7. Les Crimes de l’Amour, Nouvelles héroïques et tragiques; préc édées d’une 
Idée sur les romans et ornées de gravures, par D. -A.-F. Sade, auteur d’ 
“Aline et Valcour.” À Paris, chez Massé, éditeur -propriétaire, rue 
Helvétius nº 580.  An VIII [1800]. Four volumes, 12mo. Four 
frontispieces. This work contains eleven stories, as follows:  
Vol. I —Juliette et Raunai, ou la Conspiration d’Amboise, nouvelle 
historique; La Double Épreuve.  
Vol. II —Miss Henriette Stralson, ou les Effets du désespoir, nouvelle 
anglaise; Faxelange, ou les Torts de l’ambition; Florville et Couvral, ou  
le Fatalisme.  
Vol. III—Rodrigue, ou la Tour enchantée, conte allégorique; Laurence et 
Antonio, nouvelle italienne; Ernestine, nouvelle suédoise.  
Vol. IV —Dorgeville, ou le Criminel par Vertu; la Comtesse de Sancerre, 
ou la Rivale de sa fille, anecdote de la Cour de Bourgogne; Eugénie de 
Franval.  8. L’Auteur de “Les Crimes de l’Amour” à Villeterque, folliculaire. Paris, 
Massé, an XI  [1803]. 12mo, 20 pages.  
9. La Marquise de Gange. Paris, Béchet, Libraire, quai des Augustins, nº 63, 1813.  Two volumes, 12mo.  
POLITIC AL PAMPHLETS  
1. Adresse d’un citoyen de Paris, au roi des Français.  Paris, Girouard, no 
date [1791]. 8vo, 8 pages.  
2. Section des Piques. Observations présentées à l’Assemblée administrative 
des hôpitaux. 28 octobre 1792. De l’Imprimerie de la Section des Piques , 
rue Saint -Fiacre, nº 2., 8vo, 4 pages.  
3. Section des Piques. Idée sur le mode de la sanction des Loix; par un citoyen de cette Section. De l’Imprimerie de la rue Saint -Fiacre nº 2, 2 novembre 
1792.  8vo, 16 pages.  
4. Pétition des Sections de Paris à la Convention nationale. De l’imprimerie 
de la Section des Piques.  No date [1793]. 8vo, 4 pages.  
5. Section des Piques. Extraits des Régistres des délibérations de l’Assemblée 
générale et permanente de la Section des Piques. De l’Imprimerie de la 
Section des Piques, 17 93. 8vo, 8 pages.  
6. La Section des Piques à ses Frères et Amis de la Société de la Liberté et de l’Égalité, à Saintes, département de la Charente -Inférieure. De 
l’Imprimerie de la Section des Piques, 1793.  8vo, 4 pages.  
7. Section des Piques. Discours prononcé par la Section des Piques, aux mânes 
de Marat et de Le Pelletier, par Sade, citoyen de cette section et membre de 
la Société populaire. De l’Imprimerie de la Section des Piques, 1793.  8vo, 
8 pages. 8. Pétition de la Section des Piques, aux représentans du peu ple français. De 
l’Imprimerie de la Section des Piques, 1793.  8vo, 8 pages.  
II. PRINCIPAL POSTHUMOUS PUBLICATIONS  
1. Dorci ou la Bizarrerie du sort, conte inédit par le marquis de Sade, publié 
sur le manuscrit avec une notice sur l’auteur  [signed A. F. (Anatole 
France)]. Paris, Charavay frères, éditeurs, 1881. 16mo, 64 pages.  
2. Historiettes, Contes et fabliaux de Donatien- Alphonse -François, marquis 
de Sade, publiés pour la première fois sur les manuscrits autographes 
inédits par Maurice Heine. À  Paris, pour les membres de la Société du 
Roman Philosophique, 1926.  4to, 340 pages.  
Contains the following works: HISTORIETTES —Le Serpent; La 
Saillie gasconne; L’Heureuse Feinte; Le M …puni; L’ Évêque embourbé; 
Le Revenant; Les Harangueurs provençaux; Attrapez- moi toujours de 
même; L’ Époux complaisant; Aventure incompréhensible; La Fleur de 
châtaignier. CONTES ET FABLIAUX —L’Instituteur philosophe; La 
Prude, ou la Rencontre imprévue; É milie de Tourville, ou la Cruauté 
fraternelle; Augustine de Villeblanche, ou le Stratagème d e l’amour; Soit 
fait ainsi qu’il est requis; Le Président mystifié; La Marquise de Thélème, 
ou les Effets du libertinage; Le Talion; Le Cocu de lui -même, ou le 
Raccommodement imprévu; Il y a place pour deux; L’ Époux corrigé; le 
Mari prêtre, conte provençal ; La Châtelaine de Longueville, ou la Femme 
vengée; Les Filous.  APPENDICE —Les Dangers de la bienfaisance 
(Dorci). 
3. Dialogue entre un prêtre et un moribond, par Donatien -Alphonse -
François, marquis de Sade, publié pour la première fois sur le manuscrit autogr aphe inédit, avec un avant -propos et des notes par Maurice Heine.  
[Paris], Stendhal et Compagnie, 1926. Small 4to, 62 pages.  
4. Correspondance inédite du Marquis de Sade, de ses proches et de ses 
familiers, publiée avec une introduction, des annales et des no tes par Paul 
Bourdin.  Paris, Librairie de France, 1929. Small 4to, 452 pages.  
5. Marquis de Sade. Les Infortunes de la Vertu. Texte établi sur le manuscrit 
original autographe et publié pour la première fois avec une introduction par Maurice Heine.  Paris, Éditions Fourcade, 1930. 8vo, 206 pages.  
6. Les 120 Journées de Sodome, ou l’ École du libertinage, par le marquis de 
Sade. Édition critique établie sur le manuscrit original autographe par 
Maurice Heine. À Paris, par S. et C., aux dépens des Bibliophiles 
souscri pteurs,  1931– 1935. Three volumes, 4to, 500 pages 
(uninterrupted pagination throughout the three volumes).
3 
7. Marquis de Sade. L’Aigle, Mademoiselle …, Lettres publiées pour la 
première fois sur les manuscrits autographes inédits avec une Préface et un Comment aire par Gilbert Lely.  Paris, Les É ditions Georges Artigues, 
1949. One volume, 16mo, 222 pages.  
8. Marquis de Sade. Histoire secrète d’Isabelle de Bavière, reine de France. Publiée pour la première fois sur le manuscrit autographe inédit avec un 
avant -propos par Gilbert Lely.  Paris, Librairie Gallimard, 1953. One 
volume, 16mo, 336 pages.  
3 An earlier edition of  The 120 Days , edited by Dr. Eugen Dühren, was published in 
1904. The version is so riddled with errors, however, that Maurice Heine’s 1931 –1935 
edition must  rightly figure as the original edition of this work.                                           9. Marquis de Sade. Le Carillon de Vincennes. Lettres inédites publiées avec 
des notes par Gilbert Lely.  Paris, “Arcanes,” 1953. One volume, 16mo, 
106 pages.  
10. Marquis de Sade. Cah iers personnels (1803– 04). Publiés pour la première 
fois sur les manuscrits autographes inédits avec une préface et des notes par 
Gilbert Lely.  Paris, Corréa, 1953. One volume, 12mo, 130 pages.  
11. Marquis de Sade. Monsieur le 6. Lettres inédites (1778 –1784) p ubliées et 
annotées par Georges Daumas. Preface de Gilbert Lely.  Paris, Julliard, 
1954. One volume, 16mo, 288 pages.  
12. Marquis de Sade. Cent onze Notes pour La Nouvelle Justine. Collection 
“Le Terrain vague,” no. IV. [Paris, 1956.] Small 4to, 158 pages 
(unnumbered).  
III. PRINCIPAL UNPUBLISHED MANUSCRIPTS  
1. Œuvres diverses (1764– 1769).  Contains the one -act play Le 
Philosophe soi -disant;  the epistolary work Voyage de Hollande;  various 
letters, couplets, etc. Until the discovery of this notebook, Sade’s 
earliest w riting was thought to date from 1782.  
2. Les Jumelles ou le Choix difficile.  Two- act comedy in verse.  
3. Le Prévaricateur ou le Magistrat du temps passé.  Five-act comedy in 
verse.  
4. Jeanne Laisné, ou le Siège de Beauvais.  Five-act tragedy in verse.  
5. L’École des jal oux ou la Folle É preuve.  One-act comedy in vers libres.  
6. Le Misanthrope par amour ou Sophie et Desfrancs.  Five-act comedy in 
vers libres.  7. Le Capricieux, ou l’Homme inégal.  Five-act comedy in verse.  
8. Les Antiquaires.  One-act comedy in prose.  
9. Henriette et Sain t-Clair, ou la Force du Sang.  Prose drama in five acts.  
10. Franchise et Trahison.  Prose drama in three acts.  
11. Fanny, ou les Effets du désespoir.  Prose drama in three acts.  
12. La Tour mystérieuse . Opéra -comique  in one act.  
13. L’Union des arts ou les Ruses de l’amour.  A play in alexandrines, prose , 
and vers libres.  In the Catalogue raisonné  of 1788, this work was to 
comprise six parts and a final Divertissement.  In the extant 
manuscript, the Divertissement  and one play, La Fille malheureuse,  are 
missing.  
14. Les Fêtes de l ’amitié.  Two acts incorporating prose, verse, and 
vaudeville.  
15. Adélaïde de Brunswick, princesse de Saxe, événement du XIe siècle.  Novel.  
IV. PRINCIPAL UNPUBLISHED MANUSCRIPTS 
EITHER DESTROYED OR NOT RECOVERED4 
1. L’Égarement  de l’infortune.  Three -act prose dra ma. 
2. Tancrède.  One-act lyric play in alexandrine verse with music 
interspersed.  
4 Numbers 1 through 17 represent works mentioned in the 1788  Catalogue raisonné ; 
numbers 18 through 20 are works seized at Sade’s publisher, Massé, on 15  Ventôse, An 
IX; number 21 is the projected ten -volume work burned at the Préfecture de Police after 
Sade’s death.                                           3. La Fille malheureuse.  One-act comedy in prose.  
4. La Fine Mouche.  Tale.  
5. L’Heureux Échange . Tale.  
6. La Force du Sang. Tale.  
7. Les Inconvénients de la pitié.  Tale (first draft).  
8. Les Reli ques. Tale.  
9. Le Curé de Prato.  Tale.  
10. La Marquise de Thélème.  Tale (first draft).  
11. Le Portefeuille d’un homme de lettres.  Of this projected four -volume 
work, there exists eleven historiettes  published by Maurice Heine, an 
avertissement,  the Voyage de Hollande  previously cited, and various 
fragments.  
12. La Liste du Suisse. Historiette.  
13. La Messe trop chère. Historiette.  
14. L’Honnête Ivrogne. Historiette.  
15. N’y allez jamais sans lumière. Historiette.  
16. La justice vénitienne. Historiette.  
17. Adélaïde de Miramas, ou le Fanatism e protestan. Historiette.  
18. Les Délassements du libertin, ou la Neuvaine de Cythère.  
19. Les Caprices, ou un peu de tout.  Political work.  
20. Les Conversations du château de Charmelle.  The first draft of Les 
Journées de Florbelle.  21. Les Journées de Florbelle, ou la Na ture dévoilée, suivies des Mémoires de 
l’abbé de Modose et des Aventures d’ Émilie de Volnange servant de 
preuves aux assertions, ouvrage orné de deux cents gravures.  This 
immense work, contained in over a hundred notebooks, according to 
Lely’s estimate, wa s burned by the police at the request and in the 
presence of Sade’s son, Donatien- Claude -Armand.  