Padmasambhava (Guru Rinpoche) THE 
TIBETAN 
BOOK. OF 
THE DEAD 
[English Title] 
THE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE STATES 
[Tibetan Title] 
Composed by 
Padmasambhava 
Revealed by 
Terton Karma Lingpa 
Translated by 
Gyurme Dorje 
Edited by 
Graham Coleman with Thupten Jinpa 
Introductory Commentary by 
His Holiness the Dalai Lama 
VIKING VIKING 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, 
New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. 
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson 
Penguin Canada Inc.) 
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
Penguin Irelo.md, 25 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland 
(a division of Penguin Books Ltd) 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, 
Victoria 3124, Australia 
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pry Ltd) 
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, 
New Delhi -110 017, India 
Penguin Group (NZ), Cor Airborne and Rosedale Roads, Albany, 
Auckland 1310, New Zealand 
(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) 
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, 
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa 
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 
80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
First American edition 
Published in 2006 by Viking Penguin, 
a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2 
Translation copyright© The Orient Foundation (UK) and Gyurme Dorje, 2005 
Editorial apparatus copyright ©The Orient Foundation (UK), 
Graham Coleman, and Thupten Jinpa, 2005 
Introductory commentary copyright © His Holiness The Dalai Lama, 2005 
All rights reserved 
Thangkas painted by the late Shawu Tsering of Repkong and photographed by Jill 
Morley Smith are from the private collection of Gyurme Dorje. 
ISBN 0-6 70-85 886-2 
Printed in the United States of America 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this 
publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopy­
ing, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of 
both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book. 
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet 
or via any other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and 
punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions and do not 
participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials. 
Your support of the author's rights is appreciated. May all sentient beings, 
children of buddha nature, 
realise 
the ultimate nature of mind: 
insight and compassion, 
in blissful union. Contents 
List of Illustrations Vlll 
Acknowledgements lX 
Acknowledgements for the 
Illustrations Xll 
Introductory Commentary by His 
Holiness the XIVth Dalai Lama Xlll 
Editor's Introduction XXlX 
A Brief Literary History of the 
Tibetan Book of the Dead by 
Gyurme Dorje XXXVl 
THE TIBETAN BOOK 
OF THE DEAD 1 
Appendix One: Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities and the Tibetan 
Book of the Dead 381 
Appendix Two: Symbolism of 
the MaQQala of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities 387 
Notes 403 
Bibliography 436 
Glossary of Key Terms 443 
Thematic Index by Chapter 529 List of Illustrations 
Guru Padmasambhava u 
Karma Lingpa xliv 
The Mantra Circle of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities 346 
Colour Plates 
1. The assembly of the Forty-two Peaceful Deities 
2. Samantabhadra with Samantabhadrr, and the Peaceful Deities 
of the Buddha Family 
3· Peaceful Deities of the Vajra Family 
4· Peaceful Deities of the Ratna Family 
5. Peaceful Deities of the Padma Family 
6. Peaceful Deities of the Karma Family 
7. The Six Sages 
8. The Eight Gatekeepers 
9· The Assembly of the Fifty-eight Wrathful Deities 
10. Mahottara Heruka with Krodhesvari 
I 1. Wrathful Deities of the Buddha Family 
12. Wrathful Deities of the Vajra Family 
13. Wrathful Deities of the Rarna Family 
I 4· Wrathful Deities of the Padma Family 
15. Wrathful Deities of the Karma Family 
16. The Eight Mataral) and the Eight Pisacl Acknowledgements 
Our project began in 1988 when HH the Dalai Lama kindly 
offered to request HH Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, the late head of 
the Nyingma school, to give an oral commentary to me on key 
sections of the Tibetan Book of the Dead. The Dalai Lama knew 
that various translations had been made of 'The Great Liberation 
by Hearing', our Chapter 11, but that so far no one had translated 
the entire Tibetan Book of the Dead. HH Dilgo Khyentse gra­
ciously agreed to the Dalai Lama's request and over a period of 
four weeks gave the empowcrments and an incisive and illuminat­
ing oral commentary to the core elements of the text, which was 
eloquently translated each day by Sogyal Rinpoche. 
While in Kathmandu, receiving the oral commentary from 
HH Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, I had the good fortune to meet 
Dr Gyurme Dorje, who had previously translated Longchen 
Rabjampa's commentary to the Guhygarbha Tantra, the root 
text on which the Tibetan Book of the Dead is based. During our 
first meeting, Gyurme agreed to make a new annotated translation 
of the entire Tibetan Book of the Dead, a task he undertook with 
exceptional care and dedication over the years that followed. While 
Gyurmc was working on the translation he was also employed at 
the School of Oriental and African Studies in London as a research 
fellow, translating into English the Greater Tibetan-Chinese Dic­
tionary (Bod-rgya tshig-mdzod chen-mo). During this time, 
Gyurme worked closely with the highly regarded Nyingma master 
Zenkar Rinpoche, who is one of the foremost contemporary lin­
cage holders of the Tibetan Book of the Dead. Zenkar Rinpoche 
kindly advised Gyurme throughout the translation of our text and 
also gave an extensive oral commentary to us on Chapter 4, 'The 
Introduction to Awareness'. 
At various stages of the project, the Dalai Lama answered my X ACKr.:OW l.EDGl-.M ENTS 
questions about difficult points, and he also dictated to me the 
lucid and succinct Introductory Commentary. At the Dalai Lama's 
request, Khamtrul Rinpoche, an adviser to the Dalai Lama on 
Nyingma studies, also gave a beautiful oral commentary to key 
sections of Chapter 8 and dictated the introduction to Chapter I 1. 
Throughout the editing process I had the happy good fortune of 
working with Geshe Thupten jinpa, senior translator to the Dalai 
Lama, whom I had first met in 1 977 and who has been a close 
friend since he came to England to study philosophy at Cambridge 
in 1989. Jinpa translated the Dalai Lama's Introductory Commen­
tary and reviewed every line and word of all fourteen chapters of 
the edited translation with me twice, in the course of \vhich he 
made countless important and inspiring suggestions. Everyone 
who knows Jinpa's work is aware of his special talent and skill 
both as a translator and writer and these have played an invaluable 
role in this project. finally, the individual introductions to each of 
the chapters, except Chapter I I, were written by Dasho Sangay 
Dorji, a Bhutanese scholar, who comes from a family whose 
paternal line has been lineage holders of the Tibetan Book of the 
Dead for several generations and who throughout his childhood 
accompanied his father every time he was called to a household to 
carry out these practices. 
Needless to say it has been a wonderful privilege for us to work 
with all those who helped to make this project possible. Our 
insights and skills as writers would not even register on the most 
sensitive of detectors compared to those of the composers of the 
original cycle of teachings or the lineage holders who gave the 
commentarial explanation that guided us. Throughout this endeav­
our therefore we have tried to substitute hard work and attention 
to detail for our lack of ability and to let the original magnificence 
of the text shine through the clouds of our shortcomings as much 
as we were able . 
. My work on this project would not have been possible without 
the life-long friendship of the Orient foundation's chairman David 
Lascelles. It is difficult to thank him enough for all that he has 
made possible, beginning with our work together on the making 
of our films Tibet: A Buddhist Trilogy, in the I 970s, and ever 
since. Two other special friends, Elinore Detiger and Elsie Walker 
made it possible fur this project to be initiated, and their kindness 
and confidence, together with that of .Michael Baldwin, will never .\ C 1\ :--.; 0 \\' LED G F :<.I E :--.; T S XI 
be forgotten. ~1y sincere appreciation goes also to Johnnie and 
Buff Chace, Lucinda Ziesing, Faith Bieler, Lavinia Currier, Cynthia 
Jurs, Catherine Cochran, Nlargot Wilkie, Basil Panzer, Bokara 
Patterson and Lindsay !\-!asters for their important contributions 
in the early stages of this work. 
At Gyurme Dorje's request, Gene Smith of the Tibetan Buddhist 
Resource Center in New York generously made available a digital 
version of the three-volume manuscript from the library of the late 
Ky~1bje Dudjom Rinpoche, on which our translation is largely 
hascd. HH Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche had previously provided 
copies of the text reprinted under his supervision in Delhi. Other 
versions of the text which we consulted, including the Yaranasi 
reprint and other versions of Bhutanese and Chinese origin, are all 
from Gyurme Dorje's private collection. Some source materials 
were also kindly provided by Zcnkar Rinpoche, Tulku Jigme 
Khyentse, Dr Burkhard Quessel of the British Library, and Dr 
Fernand Meyer of CN RS in Paris. Gyurme Dorje also especially 
acknowledges the kindness and profound advice of all of his 
teachers within the Nyingma tradition, including the previous Kan­
gyur, Dudjom and Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoches, as well as Tulku 
Pema \'Vangyal and Zenkar Rinpoche, and he thanks his wife 
Xiaohong for all her encouragement and sustenance during the 
final years of this project. 
I am very grateful to Gillon Aitken, my agent, for introducing 
this project to Penguin, our publishers, and to Simon \X'inder, our 
editor at Penguin, for his patience and unfailing enthusiasm during 
the long genesis of this work. Our thanks go also to Dr Martin 
Boord for his proofreading of the text, and the Tibetan and 
Sanskrit terms in particular, and to Robert Chilton for compiling 
the thematic index. 
GRAHA,\1 COLEMAN 
Bath, England Acknowledgements for the Illustrations 
The colour illustrations that appear in our text have never pre­
viously been published. The two painted scrolls depicting the 
Hundred Peaceful and Wrathful Deities in Rcpkong style, which 
were commissioned by Gyurme Dorje in 2002, are from the studio 
of the late master artist Shawu Tsering of Sengeshong Yagotsang 
in Amdo. 
The line drawing of Guru Padmasambhava (p. ii) is the work 
of Robert Beer. The line drawing of Karma Lingpa (p. xliv) is 
reproduced by courtesy of Wisdom Publications of Boston, who 
commissioned it for inclusion in Dudjom Rinpoche's The Nyingma 
School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and History 
( 199 r ). The circular chart of mantras (htags-grol) (p. 346) is repro­
duced from Fremantle and Trungpa, The Tibetan Book of the 
Dead (Shambhala Classics, 2ooo), p. 3 2. Introductory Commentary 
by His Holiness the XIVth Dalai Lama 
The question of whether or not there exists a continuity of con­
sciousness after death has been an important aspect of philosophi­
cal reflection and debate from ancient Indian times to the present. 
When considering these matters from a Buddhist point of view, 
however, we have to bear in mind that the understanding of the 
nature of continuity of consciousness and the understanding of the 
nature of the 'I' or 'self' are closely interlinked. Therefore, let us 
first look at what it is that can be said to constitute a person. 
According to Buddhist classical literature, a person can be seen 
as possessing five interrelated aggregates, technically known as 
the five psycho-physical aggregates. • These are the aggregate of 
consciousness, the aggregate of form (which includes our physical 
body and senses), the aggregate of feeling, the aggregate of dis­
crimination, and the aggregate of motivational tendencies. That is 
to say, there is our body, the physical world and our five senses, and 
there are the various processes of mental activity, our motivational 
tendencies, our labelling of and discrimination between objects, 
our feelings, and the underlying awareness or consciousness. 
Among the ancient schools of thought, which accepted the 
notion of continuity of consciousness, there were several non­
Buddhist philosophical schools which regarded the entity, the 'I' 
or 'self', which migrated from existence to existence as being uni­
tary and permanent. They also suggested that this 'self' was auton­
omous in its relationship to the psycho-physical components that 
constitute a person. In other words they believed or posited that 
there is an essence or 'soul' of the person, which exists indepen­
dently from the body and the mind of the person. 
1. See the glossary for a description of the five psycho-physical aggregates and other 
Buddhist terms used in the commentary. Ed. XIV I:\ T H 0 lJ U C T 0 R Y C 0 ,\I .\IE:\ TAR Y 
However, Buddhist philosophy does not accept the existence of 
such an independent, autonomous entity. In the Buddhist view, 
the self or the person is understood in terms of a dynamic inter­
dependent relationship of both mental and physical attributes, 
that is to say the psycho-physical components which constitute a 
person. In other words our sense of self can, upon examination, 
be seen as a complex flow of mental and physical events, clustered 
in clearly identifiable patterns, including our physical features, 
instincts, emotions, and attitudes, etc., continuing through time. 
Further, according to Prasa11gika-Madhyamaka philosophy, which 
has become the prevailing philosophical view of Tibetan Buddhism 
today, this sense of self is simply a mental construct, a mere label 
given to this cluster of dependently arising mental and physical 
events in dependence on their continuity. 
Now, when we look at this interdependence of mental and physi­
cal constituents from the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, 4 
there are two concepts of a person. One is the temporary person 
or self, that is as \Ve exist at the moment, and this is labelled on 
the basis of our coarse or gross physical body and conditioned 
mind, and, at the same time, there is a subtle person or self which 
is designated in dependence on the subtle hody and subtle mind. 
This subtle body and subtle mind are seen as a single entity that 
has two facets. The aspect which has the quality of awareness, 
which can reflect and has the power of cognition, is the subtle 
mind. Simultaneously, there is its energy, the force that activates 
the mind towards its object- this is the subtle body or suhtle wind. 
These two inextricably conjoined qualities are regarded, in Highest 
Yoga Tantra, as the ultimate nature of a person and are identified 
as buddha nature, the essential or actual nature of mind. 
Now, before we look more closely at the nature of the subtle 
body and mind, let us look at how the gross body and mind are 
thought to originate. The notion of dependent origination lies at 
the very heart of Buddhist philosophy. The principle of dependent 
origination asserts that nothing exists in its own right independent 
of other factors. Things and events come into being only in depen­
dence on the aggregation of multiple causes and conditions. The 
process through which the external world and the sentient beings 
2. The pcrspedive of the Tibet<111 Buok u/ the De,uf is that of Highest Yoga T anrra. 
Ed. I :-.1 T H 0 () U C T 0 H Y C 0 ~I ~II·.~ T A H Y XV 
\Vithin it revolve in a cyde of existence propelled by karmic prop­
ensities and their interaction with misapprehension, attraction 
and aversion and conditions is described in terms of twelve 
interdependent links. Each cycle of the process begins with a mis­
apprehension of the nature of actual reality. This fundamental 
ignorance acts as a condition for the arising of the propensities 
created by our past actions, mental, verbal and physical, which 
condition our dualising consciousness. Our dualising conscious­
ness, in turn, conditions the qualities and mode of interaction 
of our psycho-physical aggregates, which condition our sensory 
fields, which generate contact, which generates sensations, and 
then in turn attachment, grasping, and maturation towards rebirth. 
At this point there is an interaction with the genetic constituents 
of the parents and subsequent interaction with the environment, 
and then finally we have birth, ageing and death. This cycle can be 
viewed as both illustrating the underlying processes of life, death 
and rebirth and as an illustration of the processes to be transformed 
on the path to liberation from suffering in cyclic existence. 
The notion that there is a connection between this life and the 
events of both our previous existence and our future existence, 
follows from the Buddhist understanding of the natural law of 
cause and effect. For example, although we can speak of yester­
day's weather and today's weather as distinct, today's weather is 
inextricably linked with the weather patterns of yesterday. Even 
at the bodily level, in the case of our physical health for example, 
we know that events in the past affect the present and those of the 
present the future. Similarly, in the realm of consciousness the 
Buddhist view is that there is also this same causal continuum 
between the events of the past, present and future. 
The Buddhist understanding of the continuity of personal experi­
ence, including our memories, can also be considered here. The 
Buddhist view is that the continuity of personal experience is pri­
marily founded on the capacity for retention, which can be further 
developed during one's meditative practice in this life. However, 
generally speaking, it is thought that if a person dies after a pro­
longed period of illness that has led to a prolonged degeneration 
of both physical and mental capacities, there will he a greater 
chance of many of the personal characteristics, including memories 
etc., being lost. On the other hand, in the case of someone who 
dies a sudden death, when the mind-body relationship at the gross XVI INTRODUCTORY C0.\1:'\Il-.NTARY 
level is still very firm, it is thought that there is a greater chance of 
carrying forward the acquired characteristics and memories, etc. 
Nonetheless, in both cases, the characteristics carried forward from 
a previous life are generally thought to be most strongly felt at an 
early stage of one's rebirth. This is because the personal character­
istics of the previous life are thought, generally speaking, to be 
quickly overwhelmed by the developing characteristics inherited 
from the parents of the present life. Nonetheless, as I have men­
tioned, much depends in this respect on the individual's cap<Kity 
for recall and this capacity for recall is dependent on a deepened 
retentive training acquired in this lifetime. 
Now, let us look at the possible states of existence one can be 
born into. From the Buddhist perspective, rebirth in conditioned 
existence can take place in one of three realms: the formless realm, 
the form realm or the desire realm. The form and formless realms 
arc fruits of subtle states of consciousness, attained upon the realis­
ation of certain meditative concentrations. Our realm, the desire 
realm, is the most gross of these three. Six cla~ses of beings are 
de~cribed as inhabiting the desire realm: gods (mundane celestial 
beings whose primary mental state is exaltation), antigods (who 
are predominantly hostile and jealous), human beings (who are 
intluenccd by all the five dissonant mental states), animals (\vho 
are under the sway of delusion), anguished spirits (who arc under 
the sway of attachment and unsatisfied craving) and hell beings 
(who arc overwhelmed by hatred, anger and fear). In the literature 
of Highest Yoga Tantra, the evolution of all the three realms of 
conditioned existence are described in terms of differing ex­
pressions or states of energy and, as I have mentioned, it is said 
that our fundamental ignorance is the root of conditioned existence 
and that karmic energy is its activating force. In the Buddhist view, 
therefore, it is the nature of our habitual tendencies that generates 
our future existence, driven by the natural law of cause and effect. 
Further, when we observe the patterns of arising and subsiding 
that underlie the dynamic nature of the physical environment, the 
cycle of days and nights and the passing of the seasons, for 
example, and we observe how matter arises from insubstantial 
subatomic particles and we look at the patterns of causal connec­
tedness in the arising and dissolution of our mental experienLeS 
from moment to moment, across the differing ph<lSes of deep 
sleep, dreams and our waking state, the notion of continuity of I I" T R 0 DUCT 0 R Y C 0 M .\IE :"0 TAR Y XVII 
consciousness can come to be seen to be in accord with both the 
nature of our environment and the nature of our mental experience. 
Certainly, it has often been argued that one advantage of accepting 
the notion of continuity of consciousness is that it gives us a more 
profound ability to understand and to explain the nature o{ our 
existence and of the universe. In addition, this notion of continuity 
and causal interconnectedness reinforces a sense of consequences 
for our own actions, in terms of both the impact on ourselves and 
the impact on others and the environment. 
So, in summary, when considering the notion of continuity of 
consciousness we must bear in mind that there are many different 
levels of greater or lesser subtlety in the states of consciousness. 
For example, we know of course that certain qualities of sensory 
perception are dependent on the physical constitution of the indi­
vidual and that when the physical body dies, the states of con­
sciousness associated with these sensory perceptions also cease. 
But, although we know that the human body serves as a condition 
for human consciousness, the question still remains: what is the 
nature of the underlying factor or essence that accounts for our 
experience of consciousness as having the natural quality of lumin­
osity and awareness? 
Finally, then, when considering the interrelationship between 
mind, body and the environment at the subtle level, we know that 
material things are composed of cells, atoms and particles and that 
consciousness is composed of moments. That is to say that mind 
and matter have distinctly different natures and therefore have 
different substantial causes. Material things come into being based 
on other material entities such as particles, atoms and cells and the 
mind comes into being based on a previous moment of mind, 
which is something that is luminous and has the capacity to he 
aware. Each moment of awareness therefore depends on a previous 
moment of awareness as its cause. This is the reasoning upon 
which Buddhist logic asserts that there is at the level of subtle mind 
and subtle wind a bcginningless continuum of mind and matter. 
It is through reflection on the above themes: the law of cause 
and effect, dependent origination, the dynamics of our physical 
environment, and, based on our analysis of the nature of mind, 
the mode of the arising and subsiding of thoughts, the shifts in the 
modalities of our consciousness between deep sleep, dreams and 
our waking state, etc., that the notion of continuity of conscious-XV Ill INTRODUCTOI{Y COMMENTARY 
ness may first become established as relevant to the understanding 
of our current condition. Once the notion of this continuity has 
been confirmed, through reflection and experience, then it becomes 
logical to prepare oneself for death and for future existences. 
Now, as to the nature of the actual preparation itself, this will 
depend on each individual's depth of spiritual aspiration. For 
example, if an individual is simply seeking a favourable rebirth as 
a human being, there is no need to engage in a sophisticated 
meditative path related to the processes of death and rebirth. 
Simply to live a virtuous life is seen as sufficient. Similarly, in the 
case of those who are seeking personal liberation from conditioned 
existence and also in the case of those whose practice is confined 
to the sOtra level of the Mahayana path, their meditative prep­
aration will be limited to ensuring the attainment of successive 
forms of existence that will be conducive to the continuation of 
their journey towards enlightenment. For these three kinds of 
individuals, no actual techniques for utilising the time of death as 
an essential element of the spiritual path have been set down in 
the classical Buddhist literature. Nevertheless, since the under­
standing of the processes of death, the intermediate state and 
rebirth are crucial to our understanding of the nature of existence, 
we do find extensive discussion of these three processes, even in 
the texts which relate to the aspirations of these three kinds of 
persons. 
It is exclusively in tantra, however, and particubrly in Highest 
Yoga Tantra, that the methods for utilising the processes of death, 
the intermediate state and rebirth are specifically taught as the 
basis for achieving liberation from cyclic existence. These methods 
involve the development of a skilful relationship with certain 
experiential stages that an individual actually induces with the 
intention of enhancing spiritual realisation and the fruition of their 
capacities as a human being. 
Generally speaking, the practices of Highest Yoga Tantra pre­
sent a spiritual path which enables the individual to attain complete 
buddhahood within a single lifetime, prior to the moment of death. 
Yet, for those who are unable to achieve this, it becomes crucial 
to use the rransfonnative opportunities offered by the naturally 
occurring processes of death, the intermediate state and rebirth. 
Hence, in Highest Yoga Tantra, it is not merely the preparation 
for a more developed future rebirth which is important, but of I :-.1 T R 0 0 U C T 0 R Y C 0 ,\1 M EN T A R Y XIX 
more fundamental significance is the personal preparation for 
using one's own death and subsequent states as a means of achiev-
ing liberation. . 
In the literature of Highest Yoga Tantra, as I have mentioned, 
the three realms of conditioned existence into which a human 
being may be born are described in terms of differing expressions 
or modalities of energy (rlung) and it is said that our fundamental 
ignorance is the root of conditioned existence and that karmic 
energy is its activating force. Further, from the tantric perspective, 
death, the intermediate state and rebirth are also seen as nothing 
other than differing modalities of karmic energy. The point at 
which the gross levels of energy are completely dissolved and 
only the subtle energies remain is death. The stage at which these 
energies unfold into a more manifest form is the intermediate state, 
and the stage at which they eventually manifest substantially is 
called rebirth. Thus, all three states are differing manifestations of 
energy (rlung). Based on this understanding, since death is the state 
when all the gross levels of energy and consciousness have been 
dissolved, and only the subtle energies and consciousnesses remain, 
it is possible for an advanced yogin to meditatively induce a state 
which is almost identical to the actual experience of death. This 
can be achieved because it is possible to meditatively bring about 
the dissolution of the gross levels of energy and consciousness. 
When such a task is accomplished, the meditator gains an enor­
mous potential to progress definitively in his or her spiritual prac­
tice. For at the stage, when the experience of fundamental inner 
radiance is genuinely effected through such a method, the yogin 
gains the capacity to actualise the illusory body of the meditational 
deity-thus ensuring the realisation of perfect buddhahood in this 
lifetime. 
This achievement of perfect buddhahood entails the actualis­
ation of the three dimensions or bodies of a buddha (trikaya). 
These fruitional bodies are related both to our ultimate natural 
state and to the emanational qualities of full enlightenment. Inter­
estingly, we see exactly the same pattern of dimensions in our 
ordinary existence. Death is the point at which both the physical 
and mental fields dissolve into inner radiance and where both 
consciousness and energy exist at their most subtle non-dual level, 
as in deep sleep. This mode in its fruitional state is the Buddha-body 
of Reality (dharmakaya). Then, from within this essential or XX I NT R 0 D U C T 0 R Y C 0 M ;\I EN TAR Y 
natural state, one enters into the intermediate state, where, 
although there is perceptual experience, the phenomenal forms arc 
comparatively subtle and non-substantive, as in a dream. This 
mode in its fruitional state is the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource 
(sambhogakaya). Then, from this state, one assumes a grosser 
physical existence culminating in actual rebirth, as in our normal 
waking experience. This mode in its fruitional state is the Buddha­
body of Emanation (nirmii1.zakaya). Thus, we see a direct parallel 
between the three natural states of our existence and the three 
dimensions of a fully enlightened being. 
Now, since actualisation of these three dimensions can be 
effected through the transformation of the three ordinary states of 
our existence, we find an array of practices which contain specific 
meditative techniques focusing on those attributes which the three 
ordinary states of existence and the three buddha-bodies have 
in common. Through these practices a continuity is developed 
between the ground or base (the ordinary state}, the path, and the 
fruition (the buddha-bodies). In order to highlight the potential 
for liberation which exists in the skilful transformation of the 
ordinary states of existence, the great Indian Buddhist master 
Nagarjuna uses the term 'kaya' even when describing the three 
ordinary states. Thus, the dimension (kaya) of the moment of 
death is equated with the basic dharmakiiya, the dimension (kdya) 
of the intermediate state with the basic sambhogakdya and the 
dimension (kaya) of the rebirth process with the basic nirm­
a1.zakaya.3 Thus, it is said, that through the meditative ability of an 
accomplished yogin, a genuine assimilation takes place at the 
actual moment of death, upon entering the intermediate state and 
upon beginning the process of rebirth. 
With respect to training in these practices, a similitude of such 
an assimilation can be effected during the waking state, through 
generation stage practices, and during sleep, through dream yoga 
practices. 
3. These relationships are vividly expressed in Chapter Ll of our text, 'The Great 
Liberation by Hearing', where specific instructions are given for recognising the 
spiritual opportunities that occur at the moment of death, th<lt occur Juring the 
intermediate state of reality, and that occur as the processes of rebirth are experi­
enced. ~!ere the instructions speak of a recognition which assimilates the moment 
of death with the Buddha-body of Reality, the intermediate state of reality with the 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource and the intermediate stare of rebirth with the 
Buddha-body of Emanation. EJ. I :-1 T R 0 DUCT 0 R Y C 0 .\1 .\1 EN TAR Y XXI 
In tantra the practice of imaginatively generating the medi­
tational deity, that is to say, the practice of tantra's generation 
stage, is a unique path by which the three fruitional dimensions or 
buddha-bodies arc brought into the path of one's practice. It is 
through understanding the profundity of this method that the 
tantric approach can be fully appreciated. The process of generat­
ing oneself as the meditational deity is the means by whi<..:h the 
indivisible union of the realisation of emptiness and the realisation 
of perfect awareness is brought to fruition. This accomplishment 
directly counteracts the ordinary perceptions and apprehensions 
which underlie our ordinary dualistic experience. It is this accom­
plishment that culminates in the realisation of the ultimate nature 
of mind, the Buddha-body of Reality, the state beyond ordinary 
thought, where there is no longer any trace of the misapprehension 
of the nature of reality, of attachment or of aversion -only pure 
radiant awareness. 
The practice of generating oneself as the meditational deity is 
found in all four classes of tantra. However, these methods arc 
taught in their most sophisticated forms in the class of Highest 
Yoga Tantra. Depending on the spiritual capacities of the prac­
titioner the tantras describe a graduated series of methods for 
generating oneself as the mcditational deity. In the New Transla­
tion schools there is a systematisation according to four levels of 
<..:apacity and in the Nyingma (or Old Translation) school the high­
est level of practice is further subdivided into three methods: 
~lahayoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga. 
In the primary stages of tantric practice, in order to train oneself 
in the actualisation of the three buddha-bodies, as I have men­
tioned, the yogin first engages in the practices of the generation 
stage of meditation. The generation stage is like an imaginary 
rehearsal of the actual processes. Then, in the perfection stage of 
meditation, however, the experiences of entering the Buddha-body 
of Reality and actualising its emanational states, the Buddha­
body of Perfect Resource and the Buddha-body of Emanation, 
are not imagined but real, and even involve certain physiological 
changes occurring in the yogin's body. Crucial to all these practices 
is the process of the dissolution of the gross consciousnesscs and 
energies of the practitioner. Here, the practice of Highest Yoga 
Tantra underlines the importance of interrupting or cutting off the 
gross energy which serves as a vehicle for conceptual elaborations. XXII INTRODUCTORY LO~I~IFNTARY 
Therl'hy, hypothl'tically speaking, if the individual succeeds in 
interrupting the flow of karmic energy, then, even if the propen­
sities for fundamental ignorance remain, they will be rendered 
impotent. 
As I have noted above, if we observe carefully, we can see 
a basic pattern of emergence and dissolution which is common 
to both ~minute and inanimate phenomena. Among inanimate 
phenoml'na the processes of arising start from the very subtle and 
dt"velop into the more gross. That is: there is an emergence from 
L'mpty space, and a progression to movement or energy, to heat or 
light, ro moisture or liquidity, and finally to solidity. The dissol­
ution is the ren~rse of this sequence. This process of arising and 
dissolution abo occurs in the body. In tantra, the process of dissol­
ution of the physical elements which constitute a human body is 
descrihl'd as beginning first with the dissolution of the earth 
ell'ment, followed by the water clement, the fire element, the wind 
element and, finally, at the point at which only the space element 
is prominent, all the gross levels of energy and consciousness have 
dissolved. Then, in a further series of dissolutions, this stage gives 
rise to the experiences which are called: 'whitish appearance', 
followed by 'reddish increased appL'arance', 'blackish near attain-
111l'nt' and finally there is a culmination in the full experience of 
inner radiance called 'the attainment'.~ 
lkc1Lise the stages of dissolution are natural processes, imagin­
ing these is of pre-eminent importance in the generation-stage 
practices of visualising the meditational deity. 
Both in the New and Old Translation schools, the actualisation 
of inner radi,lnce, the point at which all our gross consciousnesses 
and energies have been dissolved, is the primary intent. This is 
the essence of the Great Perfection (Dzogchen) practices' of the 
:\yingma tradition, of the Union of Emptiness and Luminosity 
Based on the Sameness of SarpsJra and Nirvar_1a practices of the 
Sakya tradition, of the Great Seal (MahJmudra) practices of the 
I<.~1gyu tradition and the Indivisible Union of Bliss and Emptiness 
pr.1ctices of the Gclug tradition. 
Now, when we speak of inner radiance, it is important to bear 
in mind that there are different levels at which this can be experi-
4· In our rexr the ... e proce-;-;c::s are JesniheJ 111 Ch~tpter S. Ed. 
5· The re;Jchinp pre'>enreJ in our rexr ;He based on rhc Grc.H Periecrion (Dzogchen) 
vtc\\·. L!. I !'IT R 0 D lJ C T 0 R Y C 0 ~I l\1 E !'-0 T A R Y XXIII 
enced and, in addition, there is one important difference between 
the Dzogchen view of inner radiance and that of the New Transla­
tion schools. As with that of emptiness, the experience of inner 
radiance can be of different types. The experience of inner radiance 
described in the New Translation schools is effected only sub­
sequent to the dissolution of all the gross levels of conceptual 
elaboration. However, in the Dzogchen view, all states of aware­
ness or consciousness are thought to be pervaded by inner radiance, 
just as a sesame seed is permeated by oil. Therefore, in Dzogchen, 
there exist refined instructions which allow the recognition of inner 
radiance even while all the gross levels of sensory activity arc still 
active. This is where we come to the important distinction made 
in the Dzogchen teachings between the Tibetan terms 'sems' and 
'rig-pa'. Our 'ordinary mind' (senzs) refers to the gross dualising 
consciousness (rnam-shes), whereas 'pure awareness' (rig-pa) is 
free from the dualistic perceptions of subject and object. Following 
the practices of the Dzogchen teachings of the Nyingma school the 
student is directly introduced by an authentic spiritual teacher to 
the very nature of his or her mind as pure awareness. This is the 
focus of the 'Cutting through Resistance' (khregs-chod) aspect of 
the Dzogchen path and this is complemented by the All-surpassing 
Realisation (tlwd-rgal) practices which focus on eliciting and 
recognising the radiances of pristine cognition.6 Irrespective of 
these differences of view and practice, however, a genuine experi­
ence of inner radiance is the realisation of the fundamental nature 
of our awareness, which is the inextricable union of emptiness and 
luminosity. 
Now, when the subtle mind is completely pure, the body or 
energy aspect of the combination of subtle mind and subtle body 
arises as the five different coloured luminosities (white, blue, red, 
yellow and green) and in the form of buddha-bodies. All the differ­
ent mai)Qalas, of the hundred deities, or the thousand deities, or 
whatever number, are all expressions of the five enlightened 
families, which arc related to the purity of the five psycho-physical 
aggregates, the five elements and the five pristine cognitions. These 
6. 'Cutting through Resistance' and the direct introduction to awareness arc the 
suhrect matter of Chapter 4 of the present work. The introduction to the intermedi­
ate state of reality, in Chapter 1 I of our text, is illustrative of the esoteric instructions 
on 'All-surpassing Realisation', which is the pinnacle of meditative practice acmrd­
ing to the "t\:yingma school. Ed. XXIV l!'<TROUUCTORY CO.\t~tEI'OTARY 
relationships form the core of the practices presented in Highest 
Yoga Tantra, as does the experiential cultivation of the nature of 
these deities through the daily practice. 
So, in summary, by following in our practice the process of the 
natural dissolution of our gross forms of consciousness, and 
the natural arising from this state of the luminosities and bodies 
of the deities, first the actualisation of inner radiance is refined 
and this serves as the substantive cause for the arising of the 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource and the Buddha-body of 
Emanation respectively. Thus the three bodies of a buddha are 
perfected, which is the fruition of the path of tantra. 
Now, as for the forms of the mcditational deity, which are 
generated in the practice of tantra, there are two principal types: 
peaceful deities and wrathful deities. In general terms, these are 
concerned with the transformation of the cognitive and emotional 
states associated with attachment and aversion respectively. The 
peaceful deities are quiescent and are expressions of the natural 
purity of attraction, that is the mind resting in its natural pristine 
state. The wrathful deities are the dynamic aspect of the peaceful 
deities and are expressions of the natural transformation of aver­
sion. That is they represent the mind's active transformation of 
delusion into pristine cognition . ., 
As we now see, the path of Highest Yoga T antra involves taking 
dissonant cognitive states, such as attachment and aversion, on 
to the path. In the path followed by pious attendants (sr.:ivaka) 
dissonant cognitive states arc categorically perceived as something 
to be renounced. In the .Mahayana path, however, there are two 
approaches which contrast with that of the pious attendants. 
According to the Mahayana sutras, if a certain situation suggests 
a positive outcome in terms of benefiting others the voluntary use 
of desire or attachment is allowable. However, in the tantras it is 
nor merely that desire or attachment is permissible when beneficial, 
here one deliberately utilises their energies as the path to purifying 
or consuming the dissonant states themselves. 
Given that the practices of the tantras indude the disciplined 
engagement of subtle physiological processes and the transforma-
7· Th~ symbolism of eal:h of the meditJttonal Jeitie~ as-.o~iateJ wuh our text is 
dc~nibl·J in Chapters 5, 6, 11 and I 4 and in Append1x Two. bi. 11\TH 0 D U CTO R Y CO~I M ENTAR Y XXV 
tion of the energies associated with attraction and aversion, before 
a practitioner can embark on the practices of tantra, he or she 
must find a spiritual teacher who meets the qualifications as set 
out in the authoritative literature and must receive empowerments 
and graduated instruction from that master. In addition, the prac­
titioner should complete the preliminary practices and achieve a 
thorough grounding in the foundational paths of the sutras, which 
includes the development of the altruistic intention to attain 
enlightenment (bodhicitta), the development of calm abiding- the 
stabilisation of attention on an internal object of meditation- and 
the development of penetrative insight -an analytical meditative 
state that dissects the nature of its object, its relationships, charac­
teristics and function. The development of calm abiding and 
penetrative insight arc the means by which the practitioner can 
cultivate his or her understanding of emptiness, which is an 
appreciation of the total absence of inherent existence and self­
identity with respect to all phenomena. It is an essential prerequisite 
for beginning on the path of tantra that the practitioner achieve a 
profound appreciation of both non-substantiality and its inter­
dependent relationship with phenomenal reality. The tantras pre­
suppose this understanding, so it is in the sutras therefore that we 
find the extensive elucidation of the methods for developing a 
complete understanding of emptiness. 
Now, as to the nature of the understanding of emptiness presup­
po-;ed by the tantras, the majority of masters of the Nyingma, 
Kagyu, Sakya and Gelug schools agree that this is the view of the 
i\liddle Way (madhyumapratipad) propounded in the sutras and 
elucidated by Nagarjuna in his works. In the Dzogchen view, 
however, there is also a unique method of explaining emptiness, 
which emphasises the inseparability of emptiness and inner radi­
ance, but nonetheless, principally, this designation docs refer to 
emptiness as presented in Nagarjuna's Middle Way. 
As far as the concept of emptiness or the ultimate nature of 
reality is concerned this is one area where there is an emerging 
convergence between the Buddhist understanding of the ultimate 
nature of existence and the evolving contemporary scientific view. 
This convergence relates to the unfindability of entities when these 
are analytically sought. In modern science the methods of analysis 
are principally applied to investigating the nature of material XXVI I NT R 0 D U C T 0 R Y C 0 ~~ ~~ EN T A R Y 
entities. Thus, the ultimate nature of matter is sought through a 
reductive process and the macroscopic world is reduced to the 
microscopic world of particles. Yet, when the nature of these 
particles is further examined, we find that ultimately their very 
existence as objects is called into question. This interface between 
non-substantiality and phenomena is a fundamental focus of 
Buddhist philosophical analysis and of experiential analysis 
through meditation on the nature of mind. As is now becoming 
more commonly known in the contemporary scientific field, a 
subtle understanding of the nature of the arising and dissolution 
of both individual thoughts and the cycles of existence lies at the 
heart of Buddhist literature and practice. 
In summary, therefore, even though the stages of preparation 
for engaging in the practices of Highest Yoga Tantra are extensive, 
it is said that, since the mode of procedure in Highest Yoga Tantra 
follows a very close correspondence to the nature of existence, 
human beings of this world are regarded as having the perfect 
gross and subtle physiological basis for undertaking these practices 
successfully. 
Normally in our lives, if we know that we are going to be 
confronted by a difficult or unfamiliar situation, we prepare and 
train ourselves for such a circumstance in advance, so that when 
this event actually happens we are fully prepared. As I have out­
lined, the rehearsal of the processes of death, and those of the 
intermediate state, and the emergence into a future existence, lies 
at the very heart of the path in Highest Yoga Tantra. These prac­
tices are part of my daily practice also and because of this I some­
how feel a sense of excitement when I think about the experience 
of death. At the same time, though, sometimes I do wonder whether 
or not I will really be able to fully utilise my own preparatory 
practices when the actual moment of death comes! 
A sense of uncertainty, and often fear, is a natural human feeling 
when thinking about the nature of death and the relationship 
between living and dying. It is perhaps not surprising therefore 
that the Bar-do Thos-grol Chen-mo, the Tibetan Book of the Dead, 
a treasure-text which focuses on this important subject, has become 
one of the best-known works of Tibetan literature in the West. 
Carrying out the first complete translation of this cycle of teachings 
has been an extraordinary accomplishment undertaken with great 
care over many years. ll'\ T R 0 DUCT 0 H Y C 0 .\I .\IE]'; TAR Y XXVII 
I hope that the profound insights contained in this work will be 
a source of inspiration and support to many interested people 
around the world, as they have been in my own culture. Editor's Introduction 
The Tibetan Book of the Dead includes one of the most detailed 
and compelling descriptions of the after-death state in world litera­
ture. It is not surprising therefore that when Chapter I I of our 
text, 'The Great Liberation by Hearing', first appeared in English, 
in 1927, it caused a considerable stir and has remained one of the 
most well known of Tibet's literary works ever since. In our work, 
for the first time, we are presenting a complete translation of all 
twelve chapters of the compilation of texts known as the Tibetan 
Book of the Dead, which includes nine chapters not translated in 
W. Y. Evans-\Ventz's original publication. 
Our intention in carrying out this work was twofold. One was 
to present the entire original work, and the second was to compose 
the translation with the close support and participation of the 
contemporary masters and lineage holders of this tradition. 
The complete Tibetan Book of the Dead is a comprehensive 
guide to both living and dying as originally taught by the great 
master from 099iyana, Padmasambhava. Padmasambhava, along 
with Santarak~ita and King Trisong Detsen, formally established 
Buddhism in Tibet, during the eighth century, and most Tibetans 
revere him as a 'second Buddha'. The story of how this teaching 
was first given by Padmasambhava to King Trisong Detsen is 
presented in Gyurme Dorje's 'Brief Literary History', which 
follows. 
The compendium of texts known as The Tibetan Book of the 
Dead contains exquisitely written guidance and practices related 
to transforming our experience in daily life, on how to address 
the processes of dying and the after-death state, and on how to 
help those who are dying. These teachings include: methods for 
investigating and cultivating our experience of the ultimate nature 
of mind in our daily practice (Chapters 2-7), guidance on the XXX EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 
recognition of the signs of impending death and a detailed descrip­
tion of the mental and physical processes of dying (Chapter 8), 
rituals for the avoidance of premature death (Chapter 9), the now 
famous guide 'The Great Liberation by Hearing' that is read to the 
dying and the dead (Chapter I 1 ), aspirational prayers that arc read 
at the time of death (Chapter 1 2), an allegorical masked play that 
light-heartedly dramatises the journey through the intermediate 
state (Chapter I 3 }, and a translation of the sacred mantras that are 
attached to the body after death and are said to bring 'Liberation by 
Wearing' (Chapter I4}. 
In addition, and at the advice of the late HH Dilgo Khyentse 
Rinpoche, we have also included two additional texts that are not 
usually included, namely Chapter I, which poetically sets out the 
preliminary meditations and practices related to this cycle of teach­
ings, and indeed to tantric practice in general, and Chapter ro, 
the instructions on methods for transferring consciousness at the 
point of death into an enlightened state, which arc referred to in 
Chapter 11 and are an essential aspect of the practices related to 
dying. 
Our second intention was to present the entire work in a way 
that, as honestly as we could, reflects the insights and intentions 
of the masters of the lineage and gives a sense of the elegance and 
moving, poetic beauty of the original work. In order to do this, as 
is described in the Acknowledgements, the translation has been 
based on the oral commentarial explanation of contemporary lin­
eage holders and was carried out with the continuous advice of 
contemporary masters. 
Given the above, there is very little to say with respect to offering 
further introduction to the meaning of the texts. It is our hope that 
with the help of HH the Dalai Lama's Introductory Commentary, 
the short introductions to each chapter, the notes and the glossary, 
the meaning will shine through as directly as was intended. 
As I have been asked to do so, I will just say a few words about 
the psychological context of this material. It may seem somewhat 
woolly to many if it is said that the insights that are presented here 
come from those who have realised the ultimate nature of mind 
and thereby have experiential understanding of the processes of 
the mind in deep sleep, dreams, the waking state and throughout 
the processes of dying and beyond. But, as described by the Dalai 
Lama in the Introductory Commentary, the process of imagining I' D IT 0 R ' ~ I N T R 0 D U C T I 0 !'; XXXI 
and then acrualising the st~tges of dissolution of consciousness 
that will occur naturally at the time of death lies at the heart 
of higher Tibetan Buddhist meditative practices, as do practices 
related to maintaining awareness during Jeep sleep and while 
dreaming. 
As Gyurme Dorje describes in "A Brief Literary History', this 
cycle of teachings is based on the Guhyagarbha Tantra. This text 
is described as having been received in a revelation from the pri­
mordial buddha Samantabhadra, transmitted through the agency 
of the meditational deities Vajrasattva and Guhyapati Vajrap<ii)i. 
In other words, the source is Samantabhadra, who is the resonance 
of pure awareness, the natural purity of mental consciousness, 
transmitted through an embodiment of the insight, compassion 
and communicative skills (skilful means) of all the buddhas, that 
is to say of all those who abide in an unmoving realisation of the 
ultimate nature of mind. 
As in all the major Buddhist tantric systems, the Guhyagarbha 
Tuntra describes a mai)c)ala, which is a visual representation of the 
components of the enlightened mind. Our chart of the mai)~ala of 
the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities (Appendix Two) sets out the 
core aspects of the symbolism of the mary~ala associated with our 
text. As is always the case, this symbolism is based on the classical 
understanding of the nature of a person's psycho-physical 
components, as described in the Abhidharma literature, which is 
common to all forms of Huddhism. This analysis of the components 
of our being can be undcrt.tken \vith our normal conceptual mind. 
The acwal experience of the luminosities which arc said to 
underlie the mai_l~lala is ho\vever only possible as a result of the 
accomplishment of very subrle meditative states, which arc fru­
itional aspects of the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. As the Dalai 
Lama relates in his commentary, these luminosities only become 
appuent to the meditator once realisation of the ultimate nature 
of mind is achieved. This occurs during the processes of medi­
tations, which are simulacra of the processes of dying and the 
re-emergence of consciousness from a non-conceptual inner radi­
ance, the mind's ultimate nature. The processes of the dissolution 
of the coarse forms of consciousness into inner radiance and the 
emergence of consciousness from inner radiance also occur natur­
ally at the time of death. In other words, according to Buddhist 
tradition, experiential access to the processes, which mirror those XXXII EDITOR's l!'<TRODUCTION 
of dying and the re-emergen~.:e of consciousness after death, is 
a~.:hievable in the waking state. 
When HH Dilgo Khyenste Rinpoche gave his commentary to 
the text he explained that the 'Introduction to the Intermediate 
State of Reality', the ~.:entral section of 'The Great Liberation by 
Hearing', is an expression of the esoteric Thodgal pra~.:tices of 
Dzogchen, the 'Great Perfection' teachings. Thodgal is the pinnacle 
of meditative practice according to the Nyingma school and it 
results in the direct experience during meditation of the lumin­
osities and the mal)<;iala of meditational deities that are described 
in Chapter 1 I. This arising of the five-coloured luminosities as a 
result of actualising the ultimate nature of mind is a phenomenon 
that has been described by all the great meditators of the four major 
Buddhist s~.:hools of Tibet and the pre-Buddhist Bon tradition. The 
point I am leading up to here is that the experiences described in 
our text relate to the modalities of our awareness from moment to 
moment, in our waking state, in deep sleep, in our dreams and 
also during the transition from life to death and beyond. 
In this sense 'The Great Liberation by Hearing' ~.:an be read as a 
wonderful metaphori~.:al narrative illustrating the pro~.:esses of our 
cognitive state, whether in our waking state or in death. 
Carl Jung in his ~.:ommentary to Evans-Wentz's 1927 edition of 
the Tibetan Book of the Dead spoke about how ~.:ompclling he 
found it to look at 'The Great Liberation by Hearing' backwards. 
From a psychoanalytical point of view this is indeed interesting, 
as our text can then be seen as providing a guide for tracing 
our confused and deluded states, back through our conditioned 
attraction and aversion to selected aspects of our experience, back 
through the weave of our habitual tendencies and mental con­
structs and a relentless series of voluntary or involuntary mental 
choices, back through the illusory comfort generated by our sense 
of ego, right back to a pure original cognitive event. This is some­
thing that we can explore during our own waking experience by 
analysing how our thoughts originate in the mind, interact with 
our mental constructs and guide our emotions and subsequent 
actions. 
Chapter 4 of our text, 'The Introduction to Awareness', 
addresses this process of exploration directly. Here we find guid­
ance for the meditator on how to recognise the mind's ultimate 
nature, the underlying, mirror-like pure awareness, free from dual-EOITOK'S INTKODUCTION XXXIII 
istic elaboration, from which all our thoughts and perceptions 
arise and into which they always again dissolve. Chapter I I then 
gives a symbolic description of how the pure radiances of our 
awareness, the ultimate nature of our pure psycho-physical 
components and elemental properties, arise as luminosities and 
meditational deities. At this critical point, either we recognise these 
luminosities and meditational deities as the embodiments of our 
own actual nature, and thereby remain in a state of pure percep­
tion, or, having failed to recognise their appearance as being a 
natural expression of the ultimate nature of all phenomena, we are 
then inexorably drawn into the clouded, dull impulses of dualistic 
experience. Once this occurs, the matrix of our habitual tendencies 
and mental constructs is activated and this generates our sense of 
independent, individual identity. By now our ego, which cannot 
accept the openness and clarity of the pristine perceptual state, is 
established and the mind functions purely on the basis of wanting 
to satisfy its conditioned expectations and impulses, from moment 
to moment. 
In this ego-bound state our thoughts, speech and actions arc 
then modulated by a process of inner judgement. As the text 
describes, death holds up an all-seeing mirror, 'the mirror of past 
actions', to our eyes, in which the consequences of all our nega­
tive and positive actions are clearly seen and there is a weighing 
of our past actions in the light of their consequences, the balance 
of which will determine the kind of existence or mental state we 
are being driven to enter. The 'life-review' aspect of this process, 
metaphorically described in our text as the weighing of white 
pebbles, representing our positive actions, against the weight of 
black pebbles, representing our negative actions, is wonderfully 
illustrated by the poet Heathcote Williams' phrase 'death develops 
life's photographs', which succinctly evokes the notion of our 
day-to-day obliviousness to the consequences of our actions being 
developed or processed in death so that we can experience them 
face to face. 
Following the expansive process of the 'life-review', the mind is 
then driven into a new equilibrium, avoiding the chaos of dis­
sociation. This twofold process of inner judgement, the 'life­
review' followed by the coalescence of the mind into a new 
modality, is symbolically represented in our text by the actions of 
Yama, who is the embodiment of the infallible laws of cause XXXIV EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 
and effect. In our waking state, this weighing and modulation 
of the momentum of our past thoughts, speech and actions is of 
course largely hidden, but we do experience this in our sense of 
'conscience' at the time of thinking, speaking or acting. In death, 
as in life, the process of inner judgement is not of course a judge­
ment by an external being but it is the result of our own mind's 
innate dynamic of manifesting the natural fruition of our own 
mental constructs and coalescing this ripening into a new equilib­
rium. At this stage, in particular, just as we are about to enter a 
changed emotive state, it is absolutely critical that we recognise 
the fundamental reality that we are experiencing the results of the 
mental states which we ourselves have generated and that we usc 
this understanding to recognise the actual nature of our experience. 
In our day-to-day life we know that if we begin to feel angry, for 
example, this immediately creates an internal disturbance and this 
disturbance creates a shift in the way we perceive both others and 
our environment, which in turn affects the way in which others 
react to us, which then reinforces our initial anger and we feel 
confirmed in that new state. This is the cycle of experiencing the 
results of the mental states that we ourselves have generated, which 
can occur from moment to moment or according to our text from 
lifetime to lifetime. 
Finally, if there is no recognition and as a culmination of this 
entire process, our text describes how, driven on by a relentless 
search for security and the urge to resolve our impulses and expec­
tations, in a mental realm where our expectations and actual reality 
do not match, and based on the ever-present swinging back and 
forth of our attraction and aversion, we enter into an emotive 
state whose focus can be anywhere across the spectrum of elation, 
jealousy, pride, confusion, blankness, desire, craving, anger, hatred 
or fear. These states are depicted in our text as the realms of 
existence into which we may pass at birth. 
Given the above, even if we do not accept the Buddhist under­
standing that the modalities of our consciousness in deep sleep, 
dreams and our waking state mirror those of death, we can still 
apply the advice given in 'The Great Liberation by Hearing' to our 
everyday experience. Giving up our compulsive attraction and 
aversion to aspects of our perceptual realm, glimpsing the causal 
dynamic of our actual condition and coming to the realisation that 
what we sec is the product of our own mental constructs, and that EUITOR'S lr-ITROUUCTION XXXV 
we therefore do have the potential to view our experience more 
insightfully, is a powerful method of releasing us from the disson­
ant and perhaps even fearful qualities of our own self-made, per­
ceptual landscape. 
Chapters I -7 provide us with a framework for achieving this 
release in our daily lives. Chapter I poetically evokes the perspec­
tives that may lead us to realise that understanding our actual 
nature and understanding our current condition as human beings 
are worthwhile, Chapters 2-6 offer us methods for training our 
minds to instinctively recognise the actual nature of our being and 
existence, and Chapter 7 provides a framework for modulating 
and refining our motivation, perspectives and actions. 
It is undeniably the case that in our society we do not easily 
accept that death is a natural part of life, which results in a per­
petual sense of insecurity and fear, and many are confused at the 
time of the death of a loved one, not knowing what they can do 
to help the one that has passed away or how to address their own 
grief. Exploring ways of overcoming our fear of death and adopting 
a creative approach at the time of bereavement, that is, focusing 
one's energy on supporting the one that has passed away, are both 
extraordinary benefits of the insights and practices that are so 
beautifully expressed in the Tibetan Book of the Dead. 
When I think of these things I often remember the Dalai Lama 
saying: 'When we look at life and death from a broader perspective, 
then dying is just like changing our clothes! When this body 
becomes old and useless, we die and take on a new body, which is 
fresh, healthy and full of energy! This need not be so bad!' 
Graham Coleman 
Thimpu, Bhutan A Brief Literary History of the 
Tibetan Book of the Dead 
by Gyurme Dorje 
Since the puhliGHion in 1927 of Lama Kazi Dawa Samdup and 
W. Y. Evans-Wentz's pioneering English translation of three chap­
ters from the cycle of texts known in the original Tibetan as The 
Greut Liberation by Heuring in the lntermediute States (Bur-du 
thos-grol chen-mo ), the chapters they translated, dealing \Vith the 
nature of the after-death state, including the accompanying aspir­
ational prayers, have attracted a compelling interest outside Tibet 
under the title the Tibetan Book of the Dead. Learned Tibetans 
today often express their surprise that this particular collection of 
meditative practices concerning methods for understanding the 
nature of mind and transforming our experiences throughout the 
round of life and death has become one of the most well known 
of all the works of Tibetan literature in translation. This renown is 
especially unexpected when one considers the esoteric origins of 
the text and its highly restricted transmission within Tibet until the 
mid-fifteenth century. It is on account of this widespread popular 
recognition however that the title coined by the editor of the 
first translation, Evans-Wentz, has been retained in all subsequent 
translations and related studies. Following in this tradition, we too 
have retained the title the Tibetan Book of the Dead to refer to 
the first complete English translation of The Great Liherution hy 
Hearing in the lntermediute States, which includes translations of 
all twelve chapters of the original compilation. 
EARLY ORIGINS 
The Greut l.iber.ltion by Heuring in the lntermediute Stutes is an 
outstanding example of Nyingma literature. The Nyingmapa are 
the followers of the oldest of all the schools of Tibetan Buddhism, A BHllF LlTl:HAHY IIISTOHY xxxvii 
tracing their lineage back to the first wave of transmission of the 
Buddhist teachings to Tibet, to the royal dynastic period of Tibetan 
history in the eighth century, when great Indian masters such as 
Padmasambhava, Vimalamitra and Buddhaguhya initially intro­
duced the three inner classes of tantra: ~~lahayoga, Anuyoga and 
Atiyoga. These tantra texts are differentiated on the basis of their 
distinctive meditative techniques, known respectively as the 
generation stage, the perfection stage and the Great Perfection 
(Dzogchen). 
All traditions of Tibetan Buddhism today share the inheritance 
of the canonical compilations of the Indian Buddhist scriptures 
and treatises contained in the Kangyur and Tengyur. The former 
contains those teachings of the Buddhas (vinaya, sOtras and 
tantras) that were translated from Sanskrit and other languages 
into Tibetan, mostly from the late tenth century onwards and 
compiled initially by Buton Rinchendrub ( 1290- I 3 64). The latter 
includes the classical Indian commentaries that were also trans­
lated from Sanskrit into Tibetan. In a recently published and 
collared master edition of both the Kangyur and Tengyur these 
texts comprise r So volumes. 
At the same time, each school has its own distinctive writings. 
The particular literature of the Nyingma school comprises transla­
tions from Sanskrit and other languages, which are preserved 
in the twenty-six volume Collected Tantras of the Nyingmapa 
(rNying-ma 'i rgyud-'bum), and a companion anthology of com­
mcntarial treatises, written by successive generations of Indian 
and Tibetan lineage holders. The latter, which has been faith­
fully handed down through a 'long lineage of oral precepts' 
(ring-brgyud bka '-ma), that is to say through an unbroken lineage 
of transmission from one generation of accomplished masters to 
the next, is continuously growing and currently comprises I 20 
volumes in a recently published edition. 
The Collected Tantras of the Nyingmapa has three main sec­
tions, corresponding to the compilations of Atiyoga, Anuyoga and 
Nlahayoga. Among them, the most influential single text is the 
Guhyagarbha Tantra, a revelation of the primordial buddha 
Samantabhadra, transmitted through Vajrasattva and Guhyapati 
Vajrapal)i. The compendium of texts that we now know as the 
Tibetan Book of the Dead bases its symbolism and iconography 
on the Guhy,lgarbha Tantra. Founded on the classical Abhidharma XXXVIII A BRIEF LITERARY HISTORY 
view of the elements, psycho-physical aggregates, etc., this tantra 
text is the earliest known literary work to portray the natural 
purity and natural transformation of our mundane psychological 
states, respectively, as the maQc)ala of the forty-two peaceful deities 
and as the maQc)ala of the fifty-eight wrathful deities. Though 
generally and rightly classified as a Mahayoga text, the Guhya­
garbha Tantra has also been obliquely interpreted from the per­
spective of Dzogchen, most famously by Longchen Rabjampa 
(I 308-6 3 ). The meditative techniques of both !v1ahayoga and 
Dzogchen are clearly expressed among the chapters of our present 
work: the generation stage of meditation is emphasised in Chapters 
5-7, and the Great Perfection in Chapters 4 and I I, these latter 
two chapters being based on the teachings of the two key aspects 
of the Great Perfection, namely Cutting through Resistance 
(khregs-chod) and All-surpassing Realisation (thod-rga/) respect­
ively. Thus from the point of view of its theoretical foundation 
and practice, as well as in its iconography and symbolism, the 
Tibetan Book of the Dead echoes its roots in the Guhyagarbha 
Tantra but, in addition, vividly incorporates the classical teachings 
of Dzogchen. 
The Guhyagarbha Tantra was initially compiled by King lndra­
bhoti and Kukkuraja of Sahor in north-west India (circa sixth 
century). The monarch, also known as King Dza, received the 
whole corpus of the N1ahayoga tantras in a vision from Vajras­
attva, and Kukkuraja, a great accomplished master, divided this 
literature into eighteen books (tantras) -the most all-embracing 
of which is the Guhyagarbha. During the eighth century, the 
Guhyagarbha Tantra was translated into Tibetan from Sanskrit 
three times: initially by Buddhaguhya and Vairocana, secondly 
by Padmasambhava and Nyak Jiianakumara, and definitively by 
Vimalamitra with Nyak Jiianakumara and Ma Rinchen Chok. A 
much later indigenous Tibetan translation was also prepared in 
the fifteenth century by Tharlo Nyima Gyeltsen and Go Lotsawa. 
The anthology of treatises related to the Guhyagarbha Tantra 
includes a large number of commentaries on this text, of both 
Indian and Tibetan origin, composed by illustrious masters such as 
Lllavajra, Buddhaguhya, Rongzom Pai)c)ita, Longchen Rabjampa 
and Lochen Dharmasri. 
The iconography and symbolism of the hundred Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities presented in the Guhyagarbha Tantra sub-A BRILF LITLHARY lll~Tl)HY XXXIX 
sequently gave rise to a whole genre of literature in Tibet known 
as the Cydes of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities (zhi-khro), 
among which our compilation of texts The Great tiberation by 
Hearing in the Intermediate States is the most influential. 
THE CLOSE LINEAGE OF TREASURES 
According to traditional accounts, when Padmasambhava intro­
duced these teachings to Tibet in the eighth century he foresaw 
that the oral transmission of the 'long lineage' would be subjected 
over time to corruption and misapplication, and that the efficacy 
of the teachings would be diminished. To counteract this, through 
the agency of his consort Y eshe Tsogyal and other foremost 
disciples, he concealed a large number of 'treasure-teachings' 
(gter-chos), in the.form of books and sacred artefacts, at power­
places (gnLZs) throughout the Tibetan plateau, predicting that 
they would be rediscovered in future generations by their re­
spective 'treasure-finders' (gter-ston) and promulgated for the sake 
of future generations. Prophecies were written, describing those 
who would have the power to unearth such revelations in the 
future -figures of the calibre of Nyangrel Nyima Ozer, Guru 
Chmvang, and the discoverer of our text, Karma Lingpa. The 
term "treasure-teachings' is generally extended to include not only 
concealed 'earth-treasures' (sa-gter), but also revelations dis­
covered in a telepathic manner directly from the enlightened inten­
tion of buddha-mind (dgongs-gter), and pure visionary experiences 
(d.zg-S1hl11g). 
This notion of the concealment of texts in the form of treasure 
had precedents in both Indian and Chinese Buddhism. Nagarjuna, 
for example, is said to have received the Prajfzaparanzita Szttras in 
the form of treasure from the ocean-depths, and, according to 
Nyingma doxographers, a recension of A-1ahayoga Tantras was 
revealed to the eight teachers of Padmasambhava, at the Sitavana 
charnel ground near Vajrasana. Similarly, the Chinese Buddhist 
tradition of elemental divination, which includes aspects of Feng 
Simi and Yi Jing, also recounts how the bodhisattva Mafljugho~a 
concealed certain divinarory texts on Wang Hai Feng, the Eastern 
Peak of the sacred iYlount \X'utai Shan. Tibetan sources then 
describe how iY1aiijugho~a subsequently revealed the Precious xl A BRIEF LITERARY HISTORY 
Clarifying Lamp (Rin-chen gsal-ba'i sgron-me) to the Chinese 
master Dahura Nagpo. 
Since the initial discoveries of the first Tibetan 'treasure-finder' 
Sangye Lama, in the eleventh century, a vast literature has been 
produced in Tibet by way of revelation through the 'close lineage 
of treasures' (nye-brgyud gter-ma), and redacted within the public 
domain. The Collected Treasures of the various treasure-finders 
are too voluminous to mention here, but many of their works are 
represented in the extensive nineteenth-century anthology known 
as the Store of Precious Treasures (Rin-chen gter-mdzod), which 
was recently republished in 76 volumes. Just as the anthology of the 
'long lineage' contains many commentaries on the Guhyagarbha 
Tmztra, a significant number of 'treasure-teachings' are also 
inspired by its portrayal of the hundred Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities. Among them the most elaborate is the cycle discovered in 
the fourteenth century by Karma Lingpa- the Peaceful and Wrath­
ful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, [entitled} Natural Libera­
tion through [Recognition of/ Enlightened Intention (Zab-chos 
zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol). The compendium of texts now 
known outside Tibet as the Tibetan Book of the Dead is an abridge­
ment of this treasury of texts discovered by Karma Lingpa. 
THE CONCEALMENT BY PADMASAMBHAVA 
The extant cycle of texts that comprise Karma Lingpa's revelations 
includes a few short biographies and historical accounts of the 
work's original concealment and subsequent revelation, which 
were composed by later lineage holders. The following passage 
from the Middle-length Empowerment (pp. 61-4) describes the 
roots of this tradition: 
At the time when [Padmasambhava] was turning incalculable 
wheels of the teachings concerning the supremely secret vehicle I of 
Vajrayana], he revealed, in accord with the individual capacities of 
the fortunate king [Trisong Detsen] and his subjects, many practices 
related to the generation and perfection stages of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities; and these were [later] concealed, for the most part, 
as profound treasures, for the benefit of beings in the future. 
When Padmasamhhava was nearing the completion of his direct A BRIEF LITERARY HISTORY 
spiritual work and teaching in Tibet, the sovereign and his son [Prince 
Mutri Tsenpo], along with the translator Chokrolui Gyelsten and 
others, offered him a mary9ala of gold and turquoise, and fervently 
made the following supplication: 'Although your compassion is 
always present and in the past you have held high the incalculable 
beacons of the teaching, according to the outer and inner vehicles, 
yet for the benefit of ourselves, the king, ministers, friends and sub­
jects, and for future beings of the degenerate age, we request you to 
give a teaching which is the quintessence of all the teachings of the 
outer and inner vehicles; one through which buddhahood may be 
attained in a single lifetime; one which will bestow liberation by 
merely hearing it, a profound and concise teaching containing the 
essential meaning.' 
Thus, [in response to their supplication] the Great Master replied, 
'0! Sovereign King, Prince, Ministers, in accord with your wish, I do 
have a teaching which is the essential point of all the six million 
four hundred thousand tantras of the Great Perfection, which were 
brought forth from the enlightened intention of glorious Samanta­
bhadra. By merely hearing this teaching, the doors leading to birth 
in inferior existences will be blocked. By merely understanding it you 
will arrive at the level of supreme bliss. Those who take its meaning 
to heart will reach the irreversible level of the spontaneously accom­
plished awareness-holders. It can bring great benefit for all those 
who are connected with it. 
'Although I do possess such a teaching, since those who are of 
weak mind, or who are naturally inclined towards the Lesser Vehicle, 
or who lack good fortune, and harbour wrong views and doubts, 
may disparage this teaching and thereby fall into inferior existences, 
you should not proclaim [this teaching] to others, even [by whisper­
ing its name] into the wind. It should be concealed as a [buried] 
treasure for the sake of future beings of the degenerate age.' 
So it was that he named this teaching, which cssentialises all teach­
ings, the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, 
fmtitledj Natural Liberation through f Recognition of} Enlightened 
Intention, and he bestowed it on the translator, l Chokro ]lui Gyeltsen, 
as his legacy [of good fortune]. Then, directing his enlightened inten­
tion towards living beings of the future degenerate age, who would 
be of meagre merit, he concealed it in the form of a treasure at Mount 
Gampodar in Dakpo, at a site which resembles a dancing god. xli xlii A BRIEF LITERARY HI~TORY 
THE PROPHECY CONCERNING 
KARMA LINGPA 
Padmasambhava 's prophesies concerning the treasure-finder 
Karma Lingpa and his immediate successors are also recounted 
elsewhere within the cycle. The following verses are taken from 
Gendun Gyeltsen 's fifteenth-century account, entitled Padma­
sambhava's Prophecy of the Treasure-finder and the Series of Auth­
entic Lineage Teachers (pp. 22ff.). In particuLlr, they offer a 
rationale for the original concealment of the texts and predictions 
regarding their subsequent discovery and secret transmission. It is 
clear that even in this early formative period the cycle of texts 
had acquired two distinct titles, The Great Liber,ltion by Hearing 
during the Intermediate States, and The Natural Liberation 
through Recognition of Enlightened Intention, reflecting its shorter 
and longer versions. 
It says in a prophetic dedaration of Orgyan Rinpoche: 
'In the future, during the final era, the degenerate age, 
When monks !act] like pigs and make women pregnanr, 
When virtuous actions generate and sustain rcsenrmenr, 
When the most nohle of monks rakes a bride, 
When factionalism and wars are widespread, 
At that rime there is no douht that all those hereft of such 
instructions 
Will fall into the inferior existences. 
So to benefit the sentient beings of this degenerJte age, 
I have committed I this cycle of teachings] to writing, 
And concealed them at .Mount Gampodar. 
In that age, a supremely fortunate son will be born. 
His father will have the name Accomplished Master NyinJa, 
And he will he the courageous "Karma Lingpa". 
On his right thigh there will he a mole, 
Resembling the eye of pristine cognition, 
And he will be born in the Jragon or snake year, 
lnro a heroic family line, the fruit of past good actions. 
May that fortunate person encounter this [teaching!! A BRIEF LITERARY HISTORY 
'But he [Karma Lingpa] should not publicly teach the cycles of 
The Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: Natural Liberation through 
[Recognition of] Enlightened Intention 
To anyone at all, even by whispering into the wind, 
And so it should remain until the time of the third lineage 
holder. 
Obstacles will arise if these [teachings] are publicly taught! 
However, he should impart the cycle of the xliii 
Great Compassionate One: Lotus Peaceful and Wrathful Deities 
To all of his fortunate students! 
'If the oral instructions of the lineage issuing from the third 
generation lineage holder 
Are kept secret for seven years, there will be no obstacles. 
When seven years have passed, 
That [third generation successor] may properly impart to others 
The empowerments and practical application of the [abridged) 
cycle, 
The [Great} Liberation [by Hearing} during the Intermediate 
States. 
Then, when nine years have passed, the [complete] cycle of the 
Natural Liberation through /Recognition of} J:nlightened 
Intention 
Should be imparted gradually, not all at once! 
'These treasures will be extracted in the region of Dakpo, in 
Southern Kongpo, 
And they will be concentrated for the sake of living beings, 
In the region of Draglong, in Upper Kongpo. 
Karma Lingpa's activity on behalf of living beings will ripen in 
the north!' 
THE LIFE OF KARMA LINGPA 
Although the exact dates of Karma Lingpa are unknown, his birth 
and death have been accurately placed within the fourteenth cen­
tury. The following passages describing his life and those of his 
immediate successors arc taken from Gyarawa Namka Chokyi 
Gyeltsen's fifteenth-century Jewel Garland: An Abridged History xllv A BRIEr LITERARY HI~TORY 
Karma Lingpa A B R 11: f LI T [ R A R Y H 1 S T 0 R Y xlv 
of the Lineage (pp. 40ff.). Of particular interest is the discovery of 
two distinct cycles of treasure-teachings, the well-known Peaceful 
and Wrathful Deities: Natural Liberation of fnlightened Inten­
tion, and the Great Compassionate One: Lotus Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities. The latter is no longer extant in this form, 
although it appears to have been the source for the masked drama 
contained in Chapter r 3 of the present work. 
!Revered as an emanation of the great translator Chokrolui 
GyeltscnJ, Karma Lingpa was born at Khyerdrup, above Dakpo in 
Southern Tibet. He was the eldest son of the accomplished master 
Nyinda Sangye, an upholder of the mantra tradition and a treasure­
finder in his o\vn right. 
In his fifteenth year, the prophetic declaration and the auspicious 
coincidence came together. From Mount Gampodar, which re­
sembles a dancing god, he extracted the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities: Natural Liberation of Enlightened Intention, along with the 
Great Compassionate One: Lotus Peaceful mzd Wrathful Deities and 
other treasures. 
Unfortunately others spoke ill of him because he did not form an 
auspicious relationship with the intended consort who had been 
prophesised for him in connection with his discovery of these trea­
sure-teachings. He did have one son, but because he showed a yellow 
scroll !containing his treasures! to his student before the time when 
he was destined to impart the Pe.lceful and Wrathfitl Deities: Natural 
Liber,ztion of bzlighte11ed Intention, it is said he encountered life­
threatening obstacles. 
Karma Lingpa was endowed with innumerable attributes, and 
dv.·clt as the very embodiment of unimpeded enlightened activity. So, 
knowing of his own untimely death, he said with prescience: 'In the 
near future, many marks in the form of lotus flowers will appear on 
my body!', and he also made numerous other clairvoyant statements. 
Then, the next year, when he was on the point of death, he granted 
the empowermcnts and transmissions of the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities: Natural Liberation of Enlightened /mention, to his son 
alone, and not to any others, saying 'You should entrust this teaching 
to a saintly person who maintains the commitments and has the 
name Nyinda. His actions for the welfare of living beings will be 
most extensive!' ~laking many such prophecies, Karma Lingpa 
passed away. xlvi A BRIEF LITERARY HISTORY 
Thus the first lineage holder was Karma Lingpa's own son, Nyinda 
Choje, the author of Chapter I of the present work. The sec<md­
generation lineage holder, Lama Nyinda Ozer ofTsikar ~lonastery 
in Longpo, was born in 1409 (earth female ox year), and he is said 
to have written down the text contained in Chapter 1 of the present 
work. It is the third-generation lineage holder Gyarawa Namka 
Chokyi Gyatso who has the distinction of being the first person to 
publicly teach the treasures of Karma Lingpa. The transmissions 
of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities and The Great Liberation by 
Hearing in the Intermediate States that eventually came to per­
meate the entire Tibetan plateau can all trace their roots back 
to his teaching activity, particularly at Menmo and Thangdrok 
monasteries in Kongpo. 
The extensive dispersion of the lineage throughout Tibet and 
the Himalayan region that issued from Gyarawa has been recently 
documented, along with visual charts, by Bryan J. Cuevas in his 
work The Hidden History of the Tibetan Book of the Dead. We 
will not therefore describe this again here. However, one important 
figure, from the perspective of the literary history, is Rigdzin Nyima 
Drakpa (I647-17Io), who in his later years, at Takmogang and 
Chakru, began transcribing and collating the various texts associ­
ated with Karma Lingpa 's cycle. It is clear from the various extant 
lineage prayers that he was directly responsible for standardising 
the shorter anthology entitled The Great Liberation by Hearing in 
the Intermediate States in its present form. 
Rigdzin Nyima Drakpa's lineage was particularly influential in 
the nomadic areas of Sok Dzong, where the mantrins of the Kabgye 
Lhakhang even now maintain the lineage of his teachings, and in 
Dzachuka, where his teacher Dzogchen Pema Rikdzin founded 
Dzogchcn ~1onastcry in I 68 5. He also formed a spiritual rapport 
with Terdak Lingpa, on account of which the transmissions of 
Tsele, Lhalung and Mindroling all converged in his own son 
Orgyan Tcndzin. Subsequently, the teachings of the Karma Lingpa 
tradition were passed on from Mindroling to Dzogchen in the 
following line of transmission: Pema Gyurme Gyatso, Gyelse 
Rarna Vija, Dzogchen II Gyurme Thekchok Tendzin, Perna 
Kundrol Namgyel and Dzogchen III Ngedon Tendzin Zangpo. The 
last named was responsible for preparing the first xylographic 
edition of The Great Liberation by Hearing in the Intermediate 
Shztes, at Dzogchen ~1onastery in the mid-eighteenth century. A BRIEf LITERARY lli~TORY 
EDITIONS AND CONTENT OF THE 
GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING IN 
THE INTERMEDIATE STATES xi vii 
The diverse strands of the lineage stemming from Karma Lingpa 
and Gyarawa, summarised above, ensured that their legacy would 
flourish throughout Tibet and in the neighbouring sub-Himalayan 
regions of Northern Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan. The earliest texts 
which these spiritual successions imparted through the generations 
were handwritten manuscripts, including a great many local 
and anonymous supplements. Yet, as Bryan Cuevas has rightly 
observed, 'most of the available recensions of [Karma Lingpa's] 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities come to us in the form of xylogra­
phic prints and facsimile reproductions from blocks carved only 
in the last two centuries'. Unfortunately, the scribal errors that 
have crept into many of these 'standard' editions subsequently 
acquired great currency. 
At present, the most extensive extant version of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities: Natural Liberation of Enlightened Intention is 
not a block-print, but the manuscript version from the library of 
the late Kyabje Dudjom Rinpochc, who in the I 96os had his 
scribe prepare an elegant three-volume edition on the basis of the 
two volumes in his possession, which were apparently of Katok 
provenance. This manuscript contains sixty-four distinct texts, 
which are arranged sequentially under the categories of history, 
empowerment, generation stage, perfection stage, introductions 
(according to the Great Perfection), path of skilful means, and 
protector liturgies. Although it is the most extensive version avail­
able, this manuscript is by no means exhaustive -for there are 
other, smaller published compilations, associated with Pelyul, 
Dzogchcn and Nedo, containing texts that arc excluded from the 
larger anthology. However, in our experience, and on the authority 
of Gene Smith, who generously made the Dudjom manuscript 
available on CD-ROM, the Dudjom manuscript is far more accu­
rate than the many Indian and Bhutanese reprints that arc more 
widely available and have provided the source for the recent partial 
translations of The Great Liberation by Hearing in the Inter­
mediate States. Even the illuminated manuscript on which Kazi xlviii A BRIEF LITERARY HISTORY 
Dawa Samdup's 1927 translation is based appears to perpetuate 
the same inaccuracies. After wrestling with the scribal errors, 
lacunae and inconsistencies that fill the various Indian reprints of 
The Great Liberation by Hearing in the Intermediate States, it was 
with considerable joy and relief that we were finally able to clarify 
obscure readings and eliminate many cumbersome and unnecess­
ary annotations by basing our translation on the three-volume 
Dudjom edition of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: Natural 
Liberation of Enlightened Intention. Seldom have we opted for 
readings based on the two Indian reprints of The Great Liberation 
by Hearing in the Intermediate States at our disposal, the Delhi 
and Varanasi photo-offset publications, and when we have done 
so, we have indicated the reason for our choice in the notes. We 
have not, however, made reference to the new Amdo edition, 
compiled by Khenpo Dorje and just published in Hong Kong. 
Readers wishing to understand the precise relationship between 
the chapters of the derivative Great Liberation by Hearing in 
the Intermediate States, and the larger cycle of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities, are referred to Appendix One, where the corre­
spondences are presented. 
As stated above, this is the first complete English translation 
of The Great Liberation by Hearing in the Intermediate States, 
otherwise known to the outside world as the Tibetan Book of the 
Dead, and it is based on a version of the original text which has 
proven to be far more accurate than those used in previ­
ous translations. All the chapters of the anthology standardised 
by Nyima Drakpa and later published in woodblock form at 
Dzogchen Monastery arc contained in this book. With the excep­
tion of Chapter I 3, Part One, which may well derive from the 
non-extant Lotus Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, and Chapter 
I 3, Part Two, which was composed by Gyarawa Namka Chokyi 
Gyatso, all the other chapters from Nyima Drakpa's compilation 
appear to have been taken from the original treasure-cycle of 
Karma Lingpa's Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. 
In presenting our translation, we have sought to order the chap­
ters according to the meaningful sequence of the intermediate states 
that arise in the course of life and death, and therefore the order 
of the chapters in this translation differs from the arrangement of 
Nyima Drakpa. In addition, we have included two further chapters 
from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities that are not part of The A BRIEf LITERARY HISTORY xlix 
Great Liber,ztion by Hearing in the Intermediate States. Chap­
ter 1, outlining the preliminary practices of meditation, is attrib­
uted to Nyinda Choje and Nyinda Ozer, while Chapter 10, on 
consciousness transference, derives from Karma Lingpa's Six 
Guidebooks of the Perfection Stage of meditation. The first of 
these has been included because it provides an essential context to 
the later chapters, and the instructions on consciousness transfer­
ence have been included because they are specifically mentioned in 
Chapter I I, as a necessary practice related to the intermediate 
state of the time of death. THE 
TIBETAN 
BOOK OF 
THE DEAD Contents 
1. Natural Liberation of the Nature of Mind: The Four-
session Yoga of the Preliminary Practice 5 
2. A Prayer for Union with the Spiritual Teacher, [entitled] 
Natural Liberation, without Renunciation of the Three 
Poisons 23 
3. Root Verses of the Six Intermediate States 29 
4. The Introduction to Awareness: Natural Liberation 
through Naked Perception 3 5 
5. The Spiritual Practice entitled Natural Liberation of 
Habitual Tendencies 59 
6. Natural Liberation of Negativity and Obscuration 
through [Enactment of] the Hundredfold Homage to the 
Sacred Enlightened Families 9 3 
7. Natural Liberation through Acts of Confession I I 3 
8. Natural Liberation through Recognition of the Visual 
Indications and Signs of Death I 5 r 
9. Natural Liberation of Fear through the Ritual Deception 
of Death r83 
10. Consciousness Transference: Natural Liberation 
through Recollection I97 
11. The Great Liberation by Hearing 217 
12. Aspirational Prayers 305 
13.A Masked Drama of Rebirth 317 
14. Liberation by Wearing: Natural Liberation of the 
Psycho-physical Aggregates 343 1 
Natural Liberation of the 
Nature of Mind: 
The Four-session Yoga of the 
Preliminary Practice CONTEXT 
In its original Tibetan this preliminary practice is beautifully written 
in verse. In the monasteries and lay households of the practitioners 
of this cycle of teachings, it is usually sung melodically in the early 
morning, before any other practice or activity is begun. Often the 
young monks sing the opening verses of this poem as they go about 
their morning duties. 
When engaging in a preliminary retreat, it is recommended that 
this meditation is done every day in four sessions: early morning till 
dawn, after sunrise until just before noon, from afternoon until just 
before sunset, and from sunset until late evening. 
The practice essentialises the 'four common or outer preliminaries' 
and the 'five uncommon or inner preliminaries', which are described 
in the glossary. It is recommended that the inner preliminary prac­
tices are repeated 1oo,ooo times as a prerequisite to receiving 
instruction on the 'generation stage' practices of the Vehicle of Inde­
structible Reality (Vajrayana). Herein is contained the Natural Liberation of the Nature of Mind: 
The four-session Yoga which is a Spiritual Practice of the Vehicle 
of Indestructible Reality, the Way of Secret Mantras, 1 an ex­
tract from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred 
Teaching, {entitled} Natural Liberation through f Recognition of} 
Enlightened lntcntion.1 
It would be excellent if one were to train one's mental con­
tinuum according to the [following] preliminary practices which 
are based on the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred 
Teaching, {entitled] Natural Liberation through {Recognition of] 
Enlightened Intention. 
COMMON PRELIMINARY PRACTICE 
0, Alas! Alas! Fortunate Child of Buddha Nature, 
Do not be oppressed by the forces of ignorance and delusion! 
But rise up now with resolve and courage! 
Entranced by ignorance, from beginningless time until now, 
You have had [more than] enough time to sleep. 
So do not slumber any longer, but strive after virtue with 
body, speech and mind! 
Are you oblivious to the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness 
and death? 
There is no guarantee that you will survive, even past this very 
day! 
The time has come [for you I to develop perseverance in r your I 
practice. PRELIMINARY PRACTICE 
For, at this singular opportunity, you could attain the 
everlasting bliss [of nirval).a]. 
So now is [certainly] not the time to sit idly, 
But, starting with [the reflection on] death, you should bring 
your practice to completion!3 
The moments of our life are not expendable, 
And the [possible J circumstances of death are beyond 
imagination. 
If you do not achieve an undaunted confident security now, 
What point is there in your being alive, 0 living creature? 
All phenomena are [ultimately] selfless, empty, and free from 
conceptual elaboration. 
In their dynamic they resemble an illusion, mirage, dream, or 
reflected image, 
A celestial city, an echo, a reflection of the moon in water, a 
bubble, an optical illusion, or an intangible emanation. 
You should know that all things of cyclic existence and 
nirval).a 
Accord [in nature] with these ten similes of illusory 
phenomena. 
All phenomena are naturally uncreated. 
They neither abide nor cease, neither come nor go. 
They are without objective referent, signless, ineffable, and 
free from thought.4 
The time has come for this truth to be realised! 
Homage to the spiritual teachers! 
Homage to the meditational deities! 
Homage to the <;lakinis! 
0, Alas! Alas! How needing of compassion are those living 
beings, tortured by their past actions, 9 
[Who are drowning] in this deep chasm, the engulfing ocean of 
their past actions! 
Such is the nature of fluctuating cyclic existence! 
Grant your blessing, so that this ocean of sufferings may run 
dry! 10 THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THE DEAD 
How needing of compassion are those who are skill-less,' 
Those who are tortured by ignorance and past actions, 
Those who indulge in actions conducive to suffering­
Even though they desire happiness! 
Grant your blessing, so that the obscuration of dissonant 
mental states and past actions may be purified! 
How needing of compassion are the ignorant and the deluded, 
[Bound! in this confining dungeon of egotistical attachment 
and the subject-object dichotomy, 
Who, like wild game, are trapped in this snare, time after time! 
Grant your blessing, so that cyclic existence may be stirred to 
its depths! 
How needing of compassion are those beings who endlessly 
revolve [in the cycle of existence], 
As if [circling] perpetually fonJ the rim of a water-wheel, 
In this six-dimensional city of imprisoning past actions! 
Grant your blessing, so that the womb entrances to the six 
classes of existence rna y be barred! 
We who are fearless and hard-hearted, despite having seen so 
many sufferings of birth, old age, sickness and death, 
Are wasting our human lives, endowed with freedom and 
opportunity6 on the paths of distraction. 
Grant your blessing, so that we may [continuously] remember 
impermanence and death! 
Since we do not recognise that impermanent [things] are 
unreliable, 
Still, even now, we remain attached, clinging to this cycle of 
existence. 
Wishing for happiness, we pass our human lives in suffering. 
Grant your blessing, so that attachment to cyclic existence may 
be reversed! 
Our impermanent environment will be destroyed by fire and 
water/ 
The impermanent sentient beings within it will endure the 
severing of body and mind. PRELIMINARY PRACTICE 
The seasons of the year: summer, winter, autumn and spring, 
themselves [exemplify] impermanence. I I 
Grant your blessing, so that disillusionment [with conditioned 
existence] may arise from the depths [of our hearts]! 
Last year, this year, the waxing and waning moons, 
The days, nights, and indivisible time moments are all 
impermanent. 
If we reflect carefully, we too are face to face with death. 
Grant your blessing, so that we may become resolute in our 
practice! 
Though this [body] endowed with freedom and opportunity is 
extremely hard to find, 
When the Lord of Death8 approaches in the semblance of 
disease, 
How needing of compassion are those who, bereft of the 
[sacred] teachings, 
Return empty-handed [from this life]! 
Grant your blessing so that la recognition of] urgency may 
grow in our minds! 
Alas! Alas! 0 Precious Jewel, embodiment of compassion! 
Since you, the Conqueror, arc endowed with a loving heart, 
Grant your blessing, so that we and the six classes of beings 
Nlay be liberated, right now, from the sufferings of cyclic 
existence! 
UNCOMMON PRELIMINARY PRACTICE 
Refuge 
:Then, the outer, inner, and secret refuges should be adopted in 
the following way:) 
Outer Refuge 
I bow down to and take refuge in the spiritual teachers 
Whose enlightened intention, throughout the past, present and 
future, 12 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Is uninterruptedly directed towards living beings, 
The infinite sentient beings of the three world systems and six 
classes. 
I bow down to and take refuge in the [perfect] buddhas, 
The Transcendent Ones Gone to Bliss of the ten directions and 
four times, 
Foremost of humankind, adorned by the major and minor 
marks, 
Whose enlightened activities are inexhaustible, and as vast as 
space. 
I bow down to and take refuge in the sacred teachings, 
Including the doctrines of the ultimate truth, quiescent and 
desire less, 
The irreversible path9 of the three vehicles, 
And the transmissions, esoteric instructions, and treatises 
Of the transmitted precepts and treasures. 
I bow down to and take refuge in the communities [of monks 
and nuns], 
Who abide on the unerring path, forming a field of all supreme 
merits, 10 
Together with the assembly of Sublime Ones, set apart from 
the stains of dissonant mental states, 
And the supreme upholders of the Teaching: bodhisattvas, 
pious attendants, and hermit buddhas. 
Inner Refuge 
I bow down to and take refuge in the spiritual teachers, 
[Embodying) the essential nature of the buddhas of the three 
times, 
The masters of all the secret and unsurpassed mal)cjalas, 
Who guide all living beings with their blessings and 
compassiOn. 
I bow down to and take refuge in the meditational deities, 
Who, even though [they remain unmoving as J the 
Buddha-body of Reality, 
Uncreated and free from the limits of conceptual elaboration, PRE LI ~~ I NARY PRACTICE 13 
Emanate in peaceful and wrathful forms for the sake of living 
beings, 
And confer the supreme and common accomplishments. 
I bow down to and take refuge in the assembly of 9akinis, 
Who, moving with the energy of compassion through the 
space of reality, 
Grant supreme bliss [as they arise] from their pure abodes, 
And bestow accomplishments upon those who keep their 
commitments. 
Secret Refuge 
From within a state free from grasping and beyond intellect, 
I take refuge in the nature of the great expanse of sameness 
and perfection, 11 
Atemporal emptiness, free from conceptual elaboration, 
Primordially pure in essence, natural expression and 
compassionate energy. 
From within [a state which is] non-conceptual, naturally 
radiant and stark, 
I take refuge in the primordial embodiment of the five 
buddha-bodies, 
Spontaneously and naturally present, 
[Abiding] in the maQ.9ala of the [unique] seminal point, 
Which is (the union ofj expanse and awareness, and of 
radiance and emptiness, 
The indestructible chain of inner radiance, that is intrinsic 
awareness. 
Throughout the three times, beginningless and endless, 
I take refuge in the Compassionate Ones, 
Unimpeded, naturally expressive, and all-pervasive, 
The unimpededly arising and subsiding rays of light, 
Which emanate through the expressive power of awareness, 
Dispelling, non-conceptually, the darkness in the minds of 
living beings. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
The Generation of an Altruistic Intention 
(Then, the altruistic intention of the Greater Vehicle should be 
generated in the following way:) 
Even though all phenomena are empty and selfless, 
Sentient beings fail to realise this. Alas! How needing of 
compassion arc they! 
So that all those who are the focus of our compassion may 
attain enlightenment, 
I must rouse my body, speech and mind to [the practice of] 
virtue! 
For the benefit of all sentient beings of the six classes, 
From now until enlightenment is attained, 
Not just for my own sake but for the benefit of all, 
I must generate the mind [aspiring] to supreme enlighten­
ment! 
How needing of compassion arc those bereft of the [sacred] 
teachings, 
Who have ensnared themselves within the unfathomable ocean 
of suffering. 
So that all those who are the focus of our compassion may be 
established in happiness, 
I must generate the mind [aspiring] to supreme enlightenment! 
I myself and all infinite sentient beings 
Arc primordially of the nature of buddhahood. 
So that we may [all] become supreme embodiments, who 
know this to be so, 
I must generate the mind [aspiring] to supreme enlightenment! 
The ocean of mundane cyclic existence is like an illusion. 
All compounded things lack permanence. 
Their essence is empty and selfless, 
But these naive beings [right here] who do not realise this to 
be so P R E L I ~11 N A R Y I' R ACT I C E 15 
Roam through cyclic existence, [driven on] by the twelve links 
of dependent origination. 
So that all beings gripped in this quagmire of name and form 
may attain buddha hood, 12 
I must rouse my body, speech, and mind to [the practice of] 
virtue! 
I take refuge [from now] until enlightenment, 
In the Buddha, the [sacred] teachings and supreme assembly. 
Through the merit of practising generosity and the other 
[perfections], 
May I attain buddhahood for the sake of [all] living beings! 
May I become a spiritual teacher, [able to) guide infinite 
sentient beings, 
As many as there are, without exception! 
(Then, one should meditate on the four immeasurable aspirations 
as follows:) 
May all sentient beings be endowed with happiness! 
~lay they all be separated from suffering and its causes! 
May they be endowed with joy, free from suffering! 
May they abide in equanimity, free from attachment or 
aversion! 
Purification of Negativity and Obscuration through 
the Repeated Recitation of the Hundred-syllable 
Mantra [of Vajrasattva] 
(This should be done in the context of the following visualisa­
tion:) 
At the crown of my head, on a lotus moon cushion, 
Is my spiritual teacher, [resplendent] in the form of 
Vajrasattva. 
His body is translucent, like crystal, and at his heart, 
[Resting] on a moon-disc, is a syllable HO¥, surrounded by the 
Hundred-syllable Mantra. 13 16 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
A stream of nectar then descends through my crown 
fontanelle, 14 
Purifying my violations [of the commitments], my negativities 
and obscurations. 
May Vajrasattva, glorious transcendent one, 
Anoint me at this very moment 
With the nectar stream of pristine cognition, 
So that the negativities and obscurations 
Of myself and all sentient beings, without exception, are 
purified. 
0¥ VAJRASATTVA SAMAYAMANUPALAYA VAJRASATTVA 
TVENOPATI~THA D~QHO ME BHAVA SUPO~YO ME BHAVA 
SUTO~YO ME BHAVA ANURAKTO ME BHAVA SARVASIDDHI:yt 
ME PRAYACCIIA SARVAKARMASU CAME ClTfA¥ SREYAI;I 
KURU H0¥ HAHAHAHA HO BHAGAVAN SARVA TATHAGATA 
VAJRA MA ME MUNCA VAJRABHAVA MAHASAMAYASATTVA 
Al;IJS 
Owing to my ignorance, delusion, and confusion, 
I have transgressed the boundaries of the commitments, 
which I should have guarded. 
0 my protector and spiritual teacher, be my refuge! 
You who are the supreme and glorious Vajra-holder, 1" 
Embodying great compassion and love, 
0 foremost of beings, be our refuge. 
Assist us to purify and cleanse, without exception, this mass of 
flaws-
Our negativitics, obscurations, transgressions, and downfalls. 
By this virtuous activity, 
May I swiftly attain [the state of] Vajrasattva, now, 
And may all sentient beings, without exception, 
Be swiftly established in that same state! 
~1ay we become exactly like you, Vajrasattva, 
Exactly resembling you in body, retinue, lifespan, fields, 
And in your supreme and exquisite major marks.17 PRELIMINARY PRACTICE 
The Mal)Qala Offering 
(Then present the mal)9ala of offerings in the following way:) 
0¥ VAJRA BHOMI A.l;l H0¥18 
The base transforms into a powerful ground of gold.19 
0¥ VAJRA REKHE A.l;l H0¥20 
The outer periphery becomes a jewelled fence of iron 
mountains, 
And at the centre is Mount Sumeru, king of mountains, 
Majestic and formed from the five precious substances, 
Exquisitely beautiful in shape, and delightful to behold, 
Encircled by seven [concentric] golden mountain ranges, 
And seven (intervening] emanational oceans. 
To the east is the continent Viratdeha, 
And to the south is Jambudvipa, 
The west is adorned by Aparagodaniya, 
And to the north is Uttarakuru. 17 
lT o either side of these continents arc 1 the eight subcontinents: 
Deha and Videha [to the east], 
Camara and Aparacamara [to the south], 
Satha and Uttaramantril)a [to the west], 
And Kurava and Kaurava [to the north]. 
I offer this [world-system], along with the sun, moon, Rahu, 
Ketu,21 
And the luxuriant resources and riches of gods and humans, 
To you, my precious spiritual teachers, and to your retinues. 
Through your compassion, please accept them for the benefit 
of all beings! 
0¥ A¥ H0¥22 
To my precious spiritual teachers and the fields of the 
Buddha-body of Emanation, 
I offer all the inestimable resources of gods and humans, 
Within the immeasurable palace of the animate and inanimate 
trichiliocosm, 
[In the form of] a dense cloud of offerings, as numerous as 
atomic particles, 
Together with Mount Sumeru and its continents. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Please accept [these offerings], with compassion and love! 
May all beings be born into the fields of the Buddha-body of 
Emanation! 
o.~ AJ:I HO¥ 
To my precious spiritual teachers and the fields of the 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, 
I offer this perfect purity of the sensory spectra and sensory 
activity fields, 
Adorned by the five sense-faculties, radiant and brilliant, 
Within the immeasurable palace of the pure energy channels of 
my body. 
Please accept [these offerings], with compassion and love! 
May all beings be born into the fields of the Buddha-body of 
Perfect Resource! 
0¥ A~l HO¥ 
To my precious spiritual teachers and the field of the 
Buddha-body of Reality, 
I offer this primordially pure and innate pristine cognition 
That abides within the immeasurable palace of the pure 
Buddha-body of Reality, which is mind's actual nature,23 
Free from an objective referent, empty, radiant, and free from 
subjective apprehension. 
Please accept [these offerings], with compassion and love! 
May all beings be born into the field of the Buddha-body of 
Reality! 
0~1 AI:I H0¥ 
By offering this exquisite and pleasing mal)~ala, 
May no obstacles arise on the path to enlightenment! 
May the enlightened intention of Those Gone to Bliss, past, 
present and future, be realised, 
May I neither be bewildered in migratory existence, 
Nor lulled by the solitary quiescence [of nirval)a]! 
But may I liberate beings throughout the expanse of space! 
0¥ AI~ HO¥ MAHA GURU DEVA QAKINI RATNA MA~QALA 
POJA MEGHA A H0¥24 PRELl~~ IN A R Y I' R ACT ICE 19 
Prayer to the Lineage Teachers 
(Then, in order to cultivate union with the spiritual teacher, the 
prayer to the lineage should be recited as follows:) 
I pray to the fdirect] intentional lineage of the conquerors: 
To Samantabhadra, primordial lord, Buddha-body of Reality, 
To the Conqueror Vajradhara, embodiment of the sixth 
[enlightened family], 
And to Vajrasattva, foremost of guides, the supreme 
buddha-mind. 
I pray to the [symbolic] lineage of the awareness holders: 
To the awareness holder Prahevajra, supreme among 
emanations, 
To the spiritual teacher Sri Sirpha, supreme son of the 
conquerors, 
To the undying Padmakara, established in the Buddha-body of 
Indestructible Reality, 
And to the 9akini [Yeshe] Tshogyalma, worthy recipient of the 
secret mantras. 
I pray to the aural lineage of [authoritative] personages: 
To Karma Lingpa, master of the profound treasures, 
To the one named [Nyinda] Choje, supreme son of his 
buddha-mind, 
And to the one named Soryacandra [Nyinda Ozer ], lord of 
living beings during this degenerate age. 
I pray ro the assembled deities of the three roots: 
To all the genuine spiritual teachers of the core lineage, 
Who form the connecting links [of this transmission]/5 
To the Peaceful and Wrathful meditational deities, in whom 
appearance and emptiness are indivisible, 
And to the oceanic assembly of <;iakinis and oath-bound 
protectors of the [sacred] teachings! 
0 you spiritual teachers who uphold the lineage of the oral 
transmission, 26 
And train each according to his or her needs! 20 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
If your teaching were to enter into decline, 
The yogins of this era would be l utterly] disheartened. 
Please, therefore, continue to guide all beings from this swamp 
of cyclic existence! 
As we call out to you with mournful and tormented cries, 
Bring to mind, now, the strict vows which you made in the 
past!27 
Reveal your faces from the expanse of space, endowed with 
major and minor marks! 
Please guide all beings from this swamp of cyclic existence! 
Let your Brahma voice reverberate like a thousand peals of 
thunder!18 
Open [wideJ the portals to the treasury of your buddha-mind! 
Pour out the light rays of your discriminative awareness and 
com passion! 
Please guide all beings from this swamp of cyclic existence! 
Liberate now, without exception, all beings of this final era!29 
Anoint l us) now with the river of the four pure 
em powermen ts! 
Liberate now the four continua, bewildered by dissonant 
mental states! 
Please guide all beings from this swamp of cyclic existence! 
Grant now the fruitional attainment of the four buddha-bodies 
of Those Gone to Bliss! 
May I become a spiritual teacher, [able] to guide all the infinite 
sentient beings, 
Who have been my parents, throughout space, without 
exception! 
Please guide all beings from this swamp of cyclic existence! 
Receiving the Four Empowerments 
(Then the meditation to be adopted while rece1vmg the four 
empowerments should be as follows:30) 
From the crown of the spiritual teacher in union with consort, 
A white syllable 0~1, [radiating] rays of light, 
Descends into the mid-point between my eyebrows, PRELIMII"ARY PRACTICE 
The vase empowerment is thus received and the obscurations 
of the body are purified. 21 
Please confer I upon meJ the accomplishments of buddha-body! 
From the throat of the spiritual teacher in union with consort, 
A red syllable AI:f, [radiating] rays of light, 
Descends into the sense faculty of my tongue, 
The secret empowerment is thus received and the obscurations 
of speech are purified. 
Please confer [upon mel the accomplishments of 
buddha-speech! 
From the heart of the spiritual teacher in union with consort, 
A blue syllable H0~1, [radiating] rays of light, 
Descends into the centre of my heart, 
The empowerment of pristine cognition is thus received, and 
the obscurations of mind are purified. 
Please confer [upon mel the accomplishments of buddha-mind! 
From the navel of the spiritual teacher in union with consort, 
A red syllable HRII:f, [radiating! rays of light, 
Descends into the centre of my navel, 
The obscurations which [mundanely] differentiate between 
body, speech and mind are purified, 
And the fourth empowerment of indivisible coemergence is 
received. 
0 glorious and precious root spiritual teacher! 
Be indivisibly present, [seated! on the pistil of a lotus within 
my heart for ever! 
Through your great kindness, favour me with your acceptance, 
And please confer [upon me] the accomplishments of 
buddha-body, speech and mind! 
May we become exactly like you, glorious spiritual teacher! 
Exactly resembling you in body, retinue, lifespan, fields, 
And in your supreme and excellent major marks. 
These verses forming the preliminary practice of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, [entitled] Natural 22 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Liberation through [Recognition of] Enlightened Intention may 
be applied as a supplementary method in the context of mental 
purification. 
This spiritual practice of the unsurpassed Greater Vehicle 
(Mahayana) is an oral teaching of [Nyinda] Choje Lingpa, the 
eldest son of the treasure-finder Karma Lingpa; and it was commit­
ted to writing by Guru Suryacandrarasmi [i.e. Nyinda Ozer]. 2 
A Prayer for Union with the 
Spiritual Teacher, [entitled] 
Natural Liberation, without 
Renunciation of the 
Three Poisons CONTEXT 
This prayer to the spiritual teacher is generally recited immediately 
after the Preliminary Practice. It is also recommended that it be recited 
at the beginning of any ritual, or when thinking of the spiritual 
teacher or whenever the practitioner is about to enter into periods of 
meditation. 
A correct perception of the spiritual teacher is considered vital for 
all practitioners of the Vehicle of Indestructible Reality (Vajrayana). 
Further, it is considered essential that a practitioner receive spiritual 
inspiration, as transmitted through an unbroken lineage of masters, 
from a living teacher. First, however, before accepting anyone as a 
spiritual teacher, it is also regarded as essential that the practitioner 
examine and scrutinise the prospective teacher over a long period of 
time and accept him or her as a qualified teacher only when it is 
certain that the person meets the requirements of a spiritual teacher 
as set out in the authoritative sacred texts. Then, if they are sure that 
their own motivation is sincere, students should follow the advice of 
their chosen spiritual teacher with incontrovertible devotion. 
Ultimately, the inspiration that is requested from the spiritual 
teacher is coming from the purity of the practitioner's own percep­
tion, altruistic intention and confidence. Herein is contained A Prayer for Union with the Spiritual Teacher, 
{Embodiment ofi the Three Buddha-bodies, [entitled/ Natural 
Liberation, without Renunciation of the Three Poisons, I r which is 
an extract] from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound 
Sacred Teaching, {entitled/ Natural Liberation through I Recog­
nition off Enlightened Intention.2 
In the palace of reality's expanse, pure and pervasive, 
Is my spiritual teacher, the Buddha-body of Reality­
Uncreated and free from conceptual elaboration. 
To you, I pray with fervent devotion. 
I request the primordially pure self-empowerment, 
The blessings of the Buddha-body of Reality/ 
So that naturally arising pristine cognition 
Is uncontrived and spontaneously present, 
Through natural liberation, 
Without renunciation of ignorance and delusion. 
In the palace of great bliss, which is pristine cognition, radiant 
and pure, 
Is my spiritual teacher, the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource­
Unimpeded and supremely blissful. 
To you, I pray with fervent devotion. 
I request the spontaneously present self-empowerment, 
The blessings of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resoun:e,4 
So that intrinsic awareness, which is pristine cognition, 
Is naturally liberated in supreme bliss/ 
Through natural liberation, 
Without renunciation of desire and clinging. PRAYER TO TilE SPIRITUAL TEACHER 
In the palace of the lotus, untainted and pure, 
Is my spiritual teacher, the Buddha-body of Emanation­
Naturally arising in unlimited forms, beyond determination. 
To you, I pray with fervent devotion. 
I request the naturally liberating self-empowerment, 
The blessings of the Buddha-body of Emanation, 
So that intrinsic awareness, which is naturally manifesting 
Pristine cognition, naturally radiates/ 
Through natural liberation, 
Without renunciation of discordant views and aversion. 
In the palace of intrinsic awareness, the genuine inner 
radiance, 27 
Is my spiritual teacher, [the unity of) the three buddha-bodies­
Beyond spatial delineation, and supremely blissful. 
To you, I pray with fervent devotion. 
I request the supremely blissful self-empowerment, 
The blessings of the Three Buddha-bodies, 
So that naturally arising pristine cognition 
Is spontaneously present as the three buddha-bodies,7 
Through natural liberation, 
Without renunciation of the subject-object dichotomy. 
How needing of compassion are suffering sentient beings, right 
here, 
Who are driven on through cyclic existence by delusion and 
confusion-
Because they do not understand that their own mind 
Is the Buddha-body of Reality, free from extremes! 
tvlJy they all actualise the Buddha-body of Reality! 
How needing of compassion are mistakenly prejudiced sentient 
beings, right here, 
Who are driven on through cyclic existence by attachment and 
cravmg-
Because they do not understand that their own awareness 
Is the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, imbued with supreme 
bliss! 
rv1ay they all actualise the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource! THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
How needing of compassion are sentient beings with 
discordant views, right here, 
Who are driven on through cyclic existence by aversion and 
dualistic perception -
Because they do not understand that their own mind 
Is the Buddha-body of Emanation, arising and subsiding 
[naturally)! 
May they all actualise the Buddha-body of Emanation! 
How needing of compassion are all unenlightened living 
beings, right here, 
Who, as a result of grasping, are obscured by dissonant mental 
states and [subtle obstructions to] knowledge-
Because they do not understand [that their own mind] 
Is indivisible from the three buddha-bodies! 
May they all actualise the three buddha-bodies! 
These verses forming A Prayer for Union with the Spiritual 
Teacher, [Embodiment of] the Three Buddha-bodies, {entitled} 
Natural Liberation, without Renunciation of the Three Poisons, 
which are an extract from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A 
Profound Sacred Teaching, [entitled] Natural Liberation through 
[Recognition of/ Enlightened Intention, were composed by Pad­
makara, the preceptor from O<;l<;liyana. 
May [the influence of] this sacred teaching not be extinguished 
until cyclic existence has been emptied!8 
This prayer was brought forth from Mount Gampodar, which 
resembles a dancing god, by the accomplished master Karma 
Lingpa. 3 
Root Verses of the Six 
Intermediate States CONTEXT 
According to this cycle of teachings, the circle of birth and death can 
be seen as being composed of six intermediate states. These six 
modalities of existence: our waking living state, dreaming, medi­
tation, the time of death, and the two successive phases of the 
after-death state are defined in the glossary. 
This poem emphasises the centrally important perspective that 
relates to each of these states. It is recommended that practitioners 
should memorise these verses and recite them repeatedly, while 
reflecting on their meaning, throughout their lives. Herein is contained the Root Verses of the Six Intermediate States.1 
I bow down to the Conquerors, the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. 
The root verses concerning the six intermediate states are as 
follows: 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of living! arises before me, 
Renouncing laziness, for which there is no time in this life, 
I must enter the undistracred path of study, reflection and 
meditation. 
Taking perceptual experience and [the nature of] mind as the 
path, 
I must cultivate actualisation of the three buddha-bodies. 
Now, having obtained a precious human body, this one time, 
I do nor have the luxury of remaining on a distracted path. 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of dreams arises before me, 
Renouncing the corpse-like, insensitive sleep of delusion, 
I must enter, free from distracting memories, the state of the 
abiding nature of reality. 
Cultivating [the experience of] inner radiance, 
Through the recognition, emanation, and transformation of 
dreams, 
I must not sleep like a beast, 
But cherish the experiential cultivation which mingles sleep 
with actual [realisation]. ROOT VERSES 33 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of meditative concentration 
arises before me, 
Renouncing the mass of distractions and confusions, 
I must undistractedly enter a state, 
Which is devoid of subjective apprehension, and free from the 
[two] extremes, 
And attain stability in the stages of generation and perfection. 
At this moment, having renounced activity, 
And having attained a singular [concentration], 
I must not fall under the sway of bewildering mental 
afflictions! 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of the time of death3 arises 
before me, 
Renouncing [all] attachment, yearning and subjective 
apprehension in every respect, 
I must undistractedly enter the path, on which the oral 
teachings are clearly understood, 
And eject my own awareness into the uncreated expanse of 
space. 
Immediately upon separation from this compounded body of 
flesh and blood, 
I must know [this body] to be like a transient illusion. 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of reality4 arises before me, 
Renouncing the merest sense of awe, terror or fear, 
I must recognise all that arises to be awareness, manifesting 
naturally of itself. 
Knowing [such sounds, lights and rays] to be visionary 
phenomena of the intermediate state, 
At this moment, having reached this critical point, 
I must not fear the assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 
which manifest naturally! 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of rebirth5 arises before me, 
I must with one-pointed intention concentrate my mind, 
And resolutely connect with the residual potency of my 
virtuous past actions. 34 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
I must obstruct the womb entrance and call to mind the 
methods of reversal. 
This is the time when perseverance and purity of perception 
are imperative. 
I must give up all jealousy and meditate on my spiritual 
teacher with consort. 
From the mouth of the accomplished masters come these 
words: 
'0, [you], with your mind far away, thinking that death will 
not come, 
Entranced by the pointless activities of this life, 
If you were to return empty-handed now, would not your 
[life's] purpose have been [utterly] confused? 
Recognise what it is that you truly need! It is a sacred teaching 
[for liberation]! 
So, should you not practise this divine [sacred] teaching, 
beginning from this very moment?' 
And it is also said, 
'If I choose not to take the oral teachings of the spiritual 
teacher to heart, 
Am I not the deceiver of myself?' 
This completes the Root Verses of the Six Intermediate States. 4 
The Introduction to Awareness: 
Natural Liberation through 
Naked Perception CONTEXT 
This chapter is the essence of the esoteric instruction by which the 
student is introduced to the ultimate nature of mind. Prior to entering 
into this practice, which focuses directly on the nature of mind itself, 
this introduction should be received from an accomplished lineage 
holder. Then, whilst in solitary retreat, it is recommended that this 
text be read repeatedly as a guide between meditation sessions. Herein is contained The Introduction to Awareness: Natural Liber­
ation through Naked Perception,' [which is an extract] from the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, 
[entitled/ Natural Liberation through/ Recognition on Enlightened 
Intention. 2 
Homage to the deities [embodying] the three buddha-bodies, who 
are the natural radiance of awareness. 
[Here], I shall present the teaching [known asJ The Introduction 
to Awareness: Natural Liberation through Naked Perception, 
[which is an extract] from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A 
Profound Sacred Teaching, {entitled/ Natural Liberation through 
{Recognition on Enlightened Intention. Thus, shall I introduce [to 
you the nature ofl intrinsic awareness. So contemplate it well, 0 
Fortunate Child of Buddha nature. 
SAMAYA rgya rgya rgya 
[THE IMPORTANCE OF THE 
INTRODUCTION TO A WARENESSJ 
EMAHO! 
Though the single lnature of] mind, which completely 
pervades both cyclic existence and nirvaQ.a, 
Has been naturally present from the beginning, you have not 
recognised it. 
Even though its radiance and awareness have never been 
interrupted, lf'I"RODUCTION TO AWARENESS 39 
You have not yet encountered its true face. 
Even though it arises unimpededly in every facet [of existence], 
You have not as yet recognised [this single nature of mind]. 
In order that this [single] nature might be recognised by you, 
The Conquerors of the three times have taught an 
inconceivably [vast number of practices], 
Including the eighty-four thousand aspects of the [sacred] 
teachings. 
Yet, [despite this diversity], not even one of these [teachings] 
has been given by the Conquerors, 
Outside the context of an understanding of this nature!3 
[And even] though there are inestimable volumes of sacred 
writings, equally vast as the limits of space, 
Actually, [these teachings can be succinctly expressed in] a few 
words,4 which arc the introduction to awareness. 
Here [is] the direct [face to face] introduction 
To the enlightened intention of the Conquerors. 
Here is the method for entering [into actual reality], 
[In this very moment!, without reference to past or future 
[events}. 
[THE ACTUAL INTRODUCTION 
TO AWARENESS] 
KYE HO! 
0 fortunate children, listen to these words! 
The term 'mind' is commonplace and widely used, 
Yet there are those who do not understand [its meaning], 
Those who falsely understand it, those who partially 
understand it, 
And those who have not quite understood its genuine reality. 
Thus there has arisen an inconceivably vast number of 
assertions [as to the nature of mindj, 
Posited by [the various] philosophical systems. 5 
Further, since ordinary persons do not understand [the 
meaning of the term 'mind' j, THE TIBI:TAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
And do not intuitively recognise its nature, 
They continue to roam through the six classes of sentient 
[rebirth] within the three world-systems, 
And consequently experience suffering.6 
This is the fault of not understanding this intrinsic nature of 
mind. 
Even though pious attendants and hermit buddhas claim that 
they understand [this single nature of mind] as the partial 
absence of self/ 
They do not understand it exactly as it is. 
Furthermore, being fettered by opinions held in accordance 
with their respective literatures and philosophical systems, 8 
There are those who do not perceive the inner radiance 
[directly]: 
The pious attendants and hermit buddhas are obscured [in this 
respect] by their attachment to the subject-object dichotomy. 
The adherents of Madhyamaka are obscured by their 
attachment to the extremes of the two truths. 
The practitioners of Kriyatantra and Yogatantra are obscured 
by their attachment to the extremes of ritual service and 
attainment.9 
The practitioners of Mahayoga and Anuyoga are obscured by 
their attachment to l the extremes of] space and awareness.10 
All these [practitioners] stray from the point because they 
polarise the non-dual reality, 
And since they fail to unify [these extremes] in non-duality, 
they do not attain buddhahood. 
Thus, all of those beings continue to roam in cyclic existence, 
Because they persistently engage in [forms of] renunciation, 
And in acts of rejection and acceptance with regard to their 
own minds, 
Where [in reality] cyclic existence and nirval)a are inseparable. 
Therefore, one should abandon all constructed teachings, 
And all [unnatural] states free from activity, 
And, by virtue of this {Introduction to) Awareness: Natural 
Liberation through Naked Perception, which is presented here, 
One should realise all things in the context of this great 
natural liberation. INTRODUCTION TO AWAREJI.OES~ 
So it is that all [enlightened attributes] arc brought to 
completion within the Great Perfection. 
SAMAYA rgya rgya rgya 
[SYNONYtv1S FOR MIND] 
As for this apparent and distinct [phenomenon] which is called 
'mind': 
In terms of existence, it has no (inherent] existence 
whatsoever. 
In terms of origination, it is the source of the diverse joys and 
sorrows of cyclic existence and nirvaQa, 
In terms of [philosophical] opinion, it is subject to opinions in 
accordance with the eleven vehicles. 
In terms of designation, it has an inconceivable number of 
distinct names: 
Some call it 'the nature of mind', the 'nature of mind itself', 
Some eternalists give it the name 'self', 
Pious attendants call it 'selflessness of the individual', 11 
Cittamatrins call it 'mind', 
Some call it the 'Perfection of Discriminative Awareness', 
Some call it the 'Nucleus of the Sugata', 
Some call it the 'Great Seal', 
Some call it the 'Unique Seminal Point', 
Some call it the 'Expanse of Reality', 
Some call it the 'Ground-of-all', 
And some call it 'ordinary [unfabricated consciousness]'. 
[THE THREE CONSIDERATIONS] 
The following is the introduction [ro the means of 
experiencing] this [single] nature [of mind] 
Through the application of three considerations: 
[First, recognise that] past thoughts are traceless, clear, and 
empty, 
[Second, recognise that] future thoughts are unproduced and 
fresh, .p. TilE TIBETA:-.: liOOK OF THE DEAD 
And [third, recognise that] the present moment abides 
naturally and unconstructed. 
When this ordinary, momentary consciousness is examined 
nakedly [and directly] by oneself, 
Upon examination, it is a radiant awareness, 
\\'hich is free from the presence of an observer, 
!\..lanifcsrly st~uk and clear, 
Completely empty and uncreated in all respects, 
Lucid, without duality of radiance and emptiness, 
Not permanent, for it is lacking inherent existence in all 
respects, 
Not a mere nothingness, for it is radiant and dear, 
1\:ot a single entity, for it is clearly perceptible as a multiplicity, 
Yet nor existing inherently as a multiplicity, for it is indivisible 
and of a single savour.12 
This intrinsic awareness, which is not extraneously derived, 
Is itself the genuine introduction to the abiding nature of [all] 
things. 
For in this [intrinsic awareness], the three buddha-bodies are 
insepar..1ble, and fully present as one: 
Its emptiness and utter lack of inherent existence is the 
Buddha-body of Reality; 
The natural resonance and radiance of this emptiness is the 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource; 
And its unimpeded arising in any form whatsoever is the 
Buddha-body of Emanation. 
These three, fully present as one, are the very essence [of 
awareness] itself. 
!CONSEQUENCES OF THE 
INTRODUCTION TO AWARENESS] 
\X'hcn the introduction is powerfully applied in accordance 
with the [above] method for entering into this [reality]: 
One's own immediate consciousness is this very f reality l! 
[Abiding! in this [reality], which is uncontrived and naturally 
radi,lnt, 1:-iTKODUCTION TO AWAREI'<ESS 
How can one say that one docs not understand the nature of 
mind? 43 
[Abiding] in this [reality], wherein there is nothing on which to 
meditate, 
How can one say that, by having entered into meditation, one 
was not successful? 
[Abiding] in this [reality], which is one's actual awareness 
itself, 
How can one say that one could not find one's own mind? 
[Abiding] in this [reality], the uninterrupted [union] of 
radiance and awareness, 
How can one say that the [true] face of mind has not been 
seen? 
lAbiding] in this [reality], which is itself the cogniser, 
How can one say that, though sought, this [cogniser] could not 
be found? 
[Abiding] in this [reality], where there is nothing at all to be 
done, 
How can one say that, whatever one did, one did not succeed? 
Given that it is sufficient to leave [this awareness] as it is, 
uncontrived, 
How can one say that one could not continue to abide [in that 
state]? 
Given that it is sufficient to leave it as it is, without doing 
anything whatsoever, 
How can one say that one could not do just that? 
Given that, [within this reality], radiance, awareness, and 
emptiness are inseparable and spontaneously present, 
How can one say that, by having practised, one attained 
nothing? 
Given that [this reality] is naturally originating and 
spontaneously present, without causes or conditions, 
How can one say that, by having made the effort [to find it], 
one was incapable [of success]? 
Given that the arising and liberation of conceptual thoughts 
occur simultaneously, 
How can one say that, by having applied this antidote [to 
conceptual thoughts}, one was not effective? 44 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
I Abiding] in this immediate consciousness itself, 
How can one say that one does not know this [reality J? u 
[OBSERVATIONS RELATED TO EXAN1INING 
THE NATURE OF ~1IND] 
Be certain that the nature of mind is empty and without 
foundation. 
One's own mind is insubstantial, like an empty sky. 
Look at your own mind to see whether it is like that or 
not. 
Divorced from views which constructedly determine [the 
nature of] emptiness, 
Be certain that pristine cognition, naturally originating, is 
primordially radiant-
Just like the nucleus of the sun, which is itself naturally 
originating. 
Look at your own mind to see whether it is like that or not! 
Be certain that this awareness, which is pristine cognition, is 
uninterrupted, 
Like the coursing central torrent of a river which flows 
unceasingly. 
Look at your own mind to see whether it is like that or not! 
Be certain that conceptual thoughts and fleeting memories are 
not strictly identifiable, 
But insubstantial in their motion, like the breezes of the 
atmosphere. 
Look at your own mind to see whether it is like that or not! 
Be certain that all that appears is naturally manifest [in the 
mind], 
Like the images in a mirror which [also] appear naturally. 
Look at your own mind to see whether it is like that or not! INTRODUCTION TO A\\'ARENl:~S 45 
Be certain that all characteristics arc liberated right where they 
are, 
Like the clouds of the atmosphere, naturally originating and 
naturally dissolving. 
Look at your own mind to see whether it is like that or not! 
There are no phenomena extraneous to those that originate 
from the mind. 
[So], how could there be anything on which to meditate apart 
from the mind? 
There are no phenomena extraneous to those that originate 
from the mind. 
[So], there are no modes of conduct to be undertaken 
extraneous [to those that originate from the mind]. 
There are no phenomena extraneous to those that originate 
from the mind. 
[So], there are no commitments to be kept extraneous [to those 
that originate from the mind]. 
There arc no phenomena extraneous to those that originate 
from the mind. 
[So], there are no results to be attained extraneous [to those 
that originate from the mind]. 
There arc no phenomena extraneous to those that originate 
from the mind. 
[So], one should observe one's own mind, looking into its 
nature again and again. 
If, upon looking outwards towards the external expanse of the 
skv . ' There arc no projections emanated by the mind, 
And if, on looking inwards at one's own mind, 
There is no projectionist who projects [thoughts] by thinking 
them, 
Then, one's own mind, completely free from conceptual 
projections, will become luminously clear. 
[This] intrinsic awareness, [union of] inner radiance and 
emptiness, is the Buddha-body of Reality, 
[Appearing] like [the illumining effect of] a sunrise on a clear 
and cloudless sky, THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
It is clearly knowable, despite its lack of specific shape or form. 
There is a great distinction between those wl;o understand and 
those who misunderstand this point. 
This naturally originating inner radiance, uncreated from the 
very beginning, 
Is the parentlcss child of awareness- how amazing! 
It is the naturally originating pristine cognition, uncreated by 
anyone -how amazing! 
[This radiant awareness I has never been born and will never 
die-how amazing! 
Though manifestly radiant, it lacks an [extraneous] perceiver­
how amazing! 
Though it has roamed throughout cyclic existence, it does not 
degenerate- how amazing! 
Though it has seen buddhahood itself, it docs not improve­
how amazing! 
Though it is present in everyone, it remains unrecognised­
how amazing! 
Still, one hopes for some attainment other than this-how 
amazing! 
Though it is present within oneself, one continues to seck it 
elsewhere- how amazing! 
[INTRINSIC AWARENESS AS VIEW, 
MEDITATION, CONDUCT, AND RESULT] 
EMA! This immediate awareness, insubstantial and radiant, 
Is itself the highest of all views. 
This non-referential, all-encompassing [awareness] which is 
free in every respect 
Is itself the highest of all meditations. 
This uncontrived [activity based on awareness], simply 
expressed in worldly terms, 
Is itself the highest of all types of conduct. 
This unsought [attainment of awareness], spontaneously 
present from the beginning, 
Is itself the highest of all results. INTROUUCTJON TO AWARENESS 
[Now], the four great media, which are errorless, are 
presented: 14 
[First], the great medium of errorless view 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is radiant and without error, it is called a 'medium'. 
[Second], the great medium of errorless meditation 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is radiant and without error, it is called a 'medium'. 
[Third], the great medium of errorless conduct 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is radiant and without error, it is called a 'medium'. 
[Fourth], the great medium of errorless result 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is radiant and without error, it is called a 'medium'. 
[Now] the four great nails, which arc unchanging, are 
presented: Js 
[First], the great nail of the unchanging view 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is firm throughout the three times, it is called a 'nail'. 
[Second], the great nail of unchanging meditation 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is firm throughout the three times, it is called a 'nail'. 
[Third], the great nail of unchanging conduct 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is firm throughout the three times, it is called a 'nail'. 
[Fourth], the great nail of the unchanging result 
Is this radiant immediate awareness-
Since it is firm throughout the three times, it is called a 'nail'. 
Now follows the esoteric instruction which reveals the three 
times to be one: 
Abandon your notions of the past, without attributing a 
~emporal sequence! 47 
Cut off your mental associations regarding the future, without 
anticipation! 
Rest in a spacious modality, without clinging to [the thoughts 
ofl the present. 
Do not meditate at all, since there is nothing upon which to 
meditate. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Instead, revelation will come through undistracted 
mindfulness -
Since there is nothing by which you can be distracted. 
Nakedly observe [all that arises] in this modality, which is 
without meditation and without distraction! 
When this l experience] arises, 
Intrinsically aware, naturally cognisant, naturally radiant and 
clear, 
It is called 'the mind of enlightenment'. 
Since [within this mind of enlightenment] there is nothing 
upon which to meditate, 
This [modality] transcends all objects of knowledge. 
Since [within this mind of enlightenment] there arc no distractions, 
It is the radiance of the essence itself. 
This Buddha-body of Reality, [union of] radiance and emptiness, 
In which [the duality of] appearance and emptiness is naturally 
liberated, 
Becomes manifest [in this way J, unattaincd by the [structured] 
path to buddhahood, 
And thus Vajrasattva is [actually] perceived at this moment. 
Now follows the instruction which brings one to the point 
where the six extreme [perspectives] are exhaustcd:16 
Though there is a vast plethora of discordant views, 
Within this intrinsic awareness or [single nature of] mind, 
Which is the naturally originating pristine cognition, 
There is no duality between the object viewed and the 
observer. 
Without focusing on the view, search for the observer! 
Though one searches for this observer, none will be found. 
So, at that instant, one will be brought to the exhaustion point 
of the view. 
At that very moment, one will encounter the innermost 
boundary of the view. 
Since there is no object at all to be observed, 
And since one has not fallen into a primordial vacuous emptiness, 17 
The lucid awareness, which is now present, 
Is itself the view of the Great Perfection. 
[Here], there is no duality between realisation and lack of 
realisation. 1:-.ITROOUCTION TO AWARENESS 
Though there is a vast plethora of discordant meditations, 
Within this intrinsic awareness, 
Which penetrates ordinary consciousness to the core, 
There is no duality between the object of meditation and the 
meditator. 49 
Without meditating on the object of meditation, search for the 
meditator! 
Though one searches for this meditator, none will be found. 
So, at that instant, one will be brought to the exhaustion point 
of meditation. 
At that very moment, one will encounter the innermost 
boundary of meditation. 
Since there is no object at all on which to meditate, 
And since one has not fallen under the sway of delusion, 
drowsiness, or agitation, 111 
The lucid uncontrived awareness, which is now present, 
Is itself the uncontrived meditative equipoise or concentration. 
[Here], there is no duality between abiding and non-abiding. 
Though there is a vast plethora of discordant modes of 
conduct, 
Within this intrinsic awareness, 
Which is the unique seminal point of pristine cognition, 
There is no duality between the action and the actor. 
Without focusing on the action, search for the actor! 
Though one searches for this actor, none will be found. 
So, at that instant, one will be brought to the exhaustion point 
of conduct. 
At that very moment, one will encounter the innermost 
boundary of conduct. 
Since, from the beginning, there has been no conduct to 
undertake, 
And since one has not fallen under the sway of bewildering 
propensities, 
The lucid uncontrived awareness, which is now present, 
Is itself pure conduct, without having to be contrived, 
modified, accepted or rejected. 
[Here], there is no duality between purity and impurity. so Tlil-. TIBETAN BOOK Of THE UEAD 
Though there is a vast plethora of discordant results, 
Within this intrinsic awareness, 
Which is the true nature of mind, the spontaneous presence of 
the three buddha-bodies, 
There is no duality between the object of attainment and the 
attainer. 
Without focusing on the attainment of the result, search for 
the attainer! 
Though one searches for this attainer, none will be found. 
So, at that instant, one will be brought to the exhaustion point 
of the result. 
At that very moment, one will encounter the innermost 
boundary of the result. 
Since, whate\'er the [projected I result, there is nothing to be 
attained, 
And since one has not fallen under the sway of rejection and 
acceptance, or hope and doubt, 
The naturally radiant awareness, which is now spontaneously 
present, 
Is the fully manifest realisation of the three buddha-bodies, 
within oneself. 
[Here[, there is the result, atemporal buddhahood itself. 
[SYNONY.\15 FOR AWARENESS] 
This awareness, free from the eight extremes, such as 
eternalism and nihilism I and so forth I, 
Is called the '!\Iiddle Way', which does not fall into any 
extremes. 
It is called 'awareness' because mindfulness is uninterrupted. 
It is given the name 'Nucleus of the Tathagata' 
Because emptiness is [naturally] endowed with this nucleus of 
awareness. 
If one understands this truth, one reaches perfection in all 
respects, 
For which reason, this [awareness] is also called the 'Perfection 
of Discriminative Awareness'. 
furthermore, it is called the 'Great Seal' because it transcends 
the intellect and is atemporally free from extremes, INTRODUCTION TO AWARENESS 51 
And, further, it is called the 'Ground-of-all', 
Because [this awareness] is the ground of all joys and sorrows 
associated with cyclic existence and nirval)a-
The distinction between these being contingent on whether or 
not this [awareness] is realised. 
[Further], this radiant and lucid awareness is itself referred to 
as 'ordinary consciousness', 
On account of those periods when it abides in its natural state 
in an ordinary non-exceptional way. 
Thus, however many well-conceived and pleasant-sounding 
names are applied to this [awareness], 
In reality, those who maintain that these names do not refer to 
this present conscious awareness, 
But to something else, above and beyond it, 
Resemble someone who has already found an elephant, but is 
our looking for its tracks [elsewhere]. 
Though one \vere to scan the [entire] external universe, 
[Searching for the nature of mind], one would not find it. 
Buddhahood cannot be attained other than through the 
mind. 
Not recognising this, one does indeed search for the mind 
externally, 
Yet, how can one find [one's own mind] when one looks for it 
elsewhere? 
This is like a fool, for example, who, when finding himself 
amidst a crowd of people, 
Becomes mesmerised by the spectacle [of the crowd] and 
forgets himself, 
Then, no longer recognising who he is, starts searching 
elsewhere for himself, 
Continuously mistaking others for himself. 
[Similarly], since one docs not discern the abiding nature, 
Which is the fundamental reality of [all] things, 
One is cast into cyclic existence, not knowing that appearances 
arc to be identified with the mind, 
And, not discerning one's own mind to be buddha, nirvai)a 
becomes obscured. 
The [apparent] dichotomy between cyclic existence and THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
nirvarya is due to [the dichotomy between] ignorance and 
awarene~s, 
But there is [in reality] no temporal divide between these two, 
[even] by a single moment. 
Seeing the mind as extraneous to oneself is indeed bewildering, 
Yet bewilderment and non-bewilderment are of a single 
essence. 
Since there exists no [intrinsic] dichotomy in the mental 
continuum of sentient beings, 
The uncontrived nature of mind is liberated just by being left 
in its natural state. 
Yet if you remain unaware that bewilderment [originates] in 
the mind, 
You will never understand the meaning of actual reality. 
So you should observe that which naturally arises and 
naturally originates within your own [mind]. 
[hrst], observe (the source] from which these appearances 
initially originated, 
[Second, observe the place] in which they abide in the interim, 
And [third, observe the place I to which they will finally go. 
Then, one will find that, ·just as, for example, a pond-dwelling 
crow docs not stray from its pond, 
Even though it flies away from the pond, 
Similarly, although appearances arise from the mind, 
They arise from the mind and subside into the mind of their 
own accord. 
This nature of mind, which is all-knowing, aware of 
everything, empty and radiant, 
Is established to be the manifestly radiant and self-originating 
pristine cognition, 
[Present] from the beginning, just like the sky, 
As an indivisible I union I of emptiness and radiance. 
This itself is actual reality. 
The indication that this is [the actual reality] is that all 
phenomenal existence is perceived in [the single nature of] one's 
own mind; 
And this nature of mind is aware and radiant. 
Therefore, recognise I this nature] to be like the sky! INTRODUCTION TO AWARENESS 
However, this example of the sky, though used to illustrate 
actual reality, 
Is merely a symbol, a partial and provisional illustration. 
For the nature of mind is aware, empty and radiant in all 
respects, 
While the sky is without awareness, empty, inanimate and 
void. 53 
Therefore, the true understanding of the nature of mind is not 
illustrated by I the metaphor of] the sky. 
lTo achieve this understanding], let the mind remain in its own 
state, without distraction! 
[THE NATURE OF APPEARANCES] 
Now, with regard to the diversity of relative appearances: 
They are all perishable; not one of them is genuinely existent. 
All phenomenal existence, all the things of cyclic existence and 
mrvaQ.a, 
Are the discernible manifestations of the unique essential 
nature of one's o\vn mind. 
[This is known because I whenever one's own mental 
continuum undergoes change, 
There will arise the discernible manifestation of an external 
change. 
Therefore, all things arc the discernible manifestations of 
mind. 
For example, the six classes of living beings discern 
phenomenal appearances in their differing ways: 
Eternalistic extremists [and others] who are remote from [the 
Buddhist perspective J, 
Perceive [appearances] in terms of a dichotomy of etcrnalism 
1nd nihilism; 
And [followers of] the nine sequences of the vehicle perceive 
[appearances] in terms of their respective views, [and so forth]. 
For as long as this diversity [of appearances] is being perceived 
and diversely elucidated, 
Differences [as to the nature of appearances] arc apprehended, 
And consequently, bewilderment comes about through 
attachment to those respective [views]. 54 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Yet, even though all those appearances, of which one is aware 
in one's own mind, 
Do arise as discernible manifestations, 
Buddhahood is present [simply] when they are not subjectively 
apprehended or grasped. 
Bewilderment does not come about on account of these 
appearances-
But it does come about through their subjective apprehension. 
[Thus], if the subjectively apprehending thoughts are known to 
be [of the single nature ofl mind, they will be liberated of their 
own accord. 
All things that appear are manifestations of mind. 
The surrounding environment which appears to be inanimate, 
that too is mind. 
The sentient life-forms which appear as the six classes of living 
beings, they too are mind. 
The joys of both the gods and humans of the higher existences 
which appear, they too are mind. 
The sorrows of the three lower existences which appear, they 
too are mind. 
The five poisons, representing the dissonant mental states of 
ignorance, which appear, they too are mind. 
The awareness, that is self-originating pristine cognition which 
appears, it too is mind. 
The beneficial thoughts conducive to attainment of nirvar:ta 
which appear, they too are mind. 
The obstacles of malevolent forces and spirits which appear, 
they too are mind. 
The deities and [spiritual] accomplishments which manifest 
exquisitely, they too are mind. 
The diverse kinds of pure [vision] which appear, they too are 
mind. 
The non-conceptual one-pointed abiding fin meditation] which 
appears, it too is mind. 
The colours characteristic of objects which appear, they too 
are mind. 
The state without characteristics and without conceptual 
elaboration which appears, it too is mind. INTRODUCTION TO AWARENESS 55 
The non-duality of the single and the multiple which appears, 
it too is mind. 
The unproveability of existence and non-existence which 
appears, it too is mind.19 
There arc no appearances at all apart from [those that 
originate in 1 the mind. 
The unimpeded nature of mind assumes all manner of 
appearances. 
Yet, though these [appearances] arise, they are without 
duality, 
And they !naturally! subside into the modality of mind, 
Like waves in the waters of an ocean. 
Whatever names are given to these unceasingly [arising] 
objects of designation, 
In actuality, there is but one [single nature of] mind, 
And that single [nature of mind] is without foundation and 
without root. 
[Therefore], it is not perceptible at all, in any direction 
whatsoever. 
It is not perceptible as substance, for it lacks inherent existence 
in all respects. 
It is not perceptible as emptiness, for it is the resonance of 
awareness and radiance. 
It is not perceptible as diversity, for it is the indivisibility of 
radiance and emptiness. 
This present intrinsic awareness is manifestly radiant and 
clear, 
And even though there exists no known means by which it can 
be fabricated, 
And even though !this awareness! is without inherent 
existence, 
It can be directly experienced. 
[Thus], if it is experientially cultivated, alii beings] will be 
liberated. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
[CONCLUSION] 
All those of all [differing] potential, regardless of their acumen 
or dullness, 
May realise [this intrinsic awareness]. 
However, for example, even though sesame is the source of oil, 
and milk of butter, 
But there will be no extract if these are unpressed or 
unchurned, 
Similarly, even though all beings actually possess the seed of 
buddha hood, 
Sentient beings will not attain buddhahood without 
experiential cultivation. 
Nonetheless, even a cowherd will attain liberation if he or she 
engages in experiential cultivation. 
For, even though one may not know how to elucidate [this 
state] intellectually, 
One will[through experiential cultivation] become manifestly 
established in it. 
One whose mouth has actually tasted molasses, 
Does not need others to explain its taste. 
But, even learned scholars who have not realised [this single 
nature of mind] will remain the victims of bewilderment. 
For, however learned and knowledgeable in explaining the 
nine vehicles they may be, 
They will be like those who spread fabulous tales of remote 
[places] they have never seen, 
And as far as the attainment of buddhahood is concerned, 
They will not approach it, even for an instant. 
If this nature [of intrinsic awareness] is understood, 
Virtuous and negative acts will be liberated, right where they 
are. 
But if this [single nature] is not understood, 
One will amass nothing but [future lives within] cyclic 
existence, with its higher and lower realms, 
Regardless of whether one has engaged in virtuous or 
non-virtuous actions. INTRODUCTION TO AWARENESS 
Yet, if one's own mind is simply understood to be pristine 
cognition~ [utterly] empty [of inherent existence], 
The consequences of virtuous and negative actions will never 
come to fruition-
For just as a spring cannot materialise in empty space, 
Within [the realisation of] emptiness, virtuous and negative 
actions do not objectively exist.20 
So it is that, for the purpose of nakedly perceiving the 
manifestly present intrinsic awareness, 
This Natural Liberation through Naked Perception is most 
profound. 
Thus, [by following this instruction], one should familiarise 
oneself with this intrinsic awareness. 
Profoundly Scaled! 
E-MA! 
This Introduction to Awareness: Natural Liberation through 
Naked Perception 
Has been composed for the sake of future generations, the 
sentient beings of a degenerate age. 
[It integrates] in a purposeful concise abridgement, 
All my preferred tantras, transmissions and esoteric 
instructions. 
Though I have disseminated it at this present time, 
It will be concealed as a precious treasure. 
May it be encountered by those of the future, 
Who have a [positive] inheritance of past actions.21 
SAMAYA rgya rgya rgya! 57 
This treatise concerning the direct introduction to awareness, 
entitled Natural Liberation through Naked Perception, was 
r.omposed by Padmakara, the preceptor of 099iyana. May [its 
influence] not be ended until cyclic existence has been emptied. 5 
The Spiritual Practice 
entitled Natural Liberation of 
Habitual Tendencies CONTEXT 
This is the concise 'generation stage' practice associated with this 
cycle of teachings. Normally, after completing the preparatory philo­
sophical studies and meditation a! practices over many years, the full 
generation stage practice entitled The Natural Liberation of Feelings 
would be done four times a day while in an extended solitary retreat. 
Following this retreat, the full generation stage practice should be 
done at least monthly. As a method for enhancing and sustaining an 
unbroken purity of perception, this concise practice, The Natural 
Liberation of Habitual Tendencies, should be done three times a day, 
in the morning, at midday and in the evening, throughout the prac­
titioner's life. If this is not practical, then the concise practice should 
be done twice a day, in the morning and evening, or at least once a 
day in the morning, following the Preliminary Practice (Chapter 1 ). 
The aim is to provide a means by which the practitioner can · 
cultivate an unwavering recognition of the nature of the Peaceful 
and Wrathful Deities within his or her own mind and body. Thereby 
recognition of the natural purity of the practitioner's impure habitual 
tendencies is continuously developed. The measure of successful 
training is: the location and nature of the deities will be remembered 
even in the practitioner's dreams, and, the arising of a sustained 
recognition that all phenomena, sounds and thoughts are, in their 
essence, the body, speech and mind of the deities. Herein is contained The Spiritual Practice entitled Natural Lib­
eration of Habitual Tendencies,1 [which is an extract] from the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, fen­
titled} Natural Liberation through [Recognition of} Enlightened 
Intention. 2 
I respectfully bow down to Samantabhadra and Mahottara, 3 
To the assembly of the Peaceful and Wrathful deities, 
And to the assembly of the Hundred Sacred Enlightened 
Families! 
Having been liberated in the intermediate states, 
.Nlay all beings abide in the reality of the three buddha-bodies. 
0 You who are fortunate and auspiciously blessed, 
Apply [yourself to] the meditations and recitations of this most 
lucid Spiritual Practice, 
Which is a coalescence of the [full means of accomplishment] 
of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities! 
Never forget [to practise this] throughout the three times. 
THE TEN-BRANCHED PRAYER FOR THE 
ACCUMULATION [OF MERITJ 
[First], visualise in the space before you the Three Precious Jewels 
and the deities of the hundred enlightened families, and then recite · 
as follows: DAILY PRACTICE 
The Branch of Taking Refuge 
0¥ AI~ HO~l 
I respectfully take refuge, inseparably, from now until 
enlightenment, 
In the infinitude of Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, the 
Conquerors Gone to Bliss, 
The Three Precious Jewels, the meditational deities, 
The ocean of ~akinis, and assembly of oath-bound protectors, 
Within the infinite I buddha] fields, reaching to the limits of 
space. 
The Branch of Invitation 
I request the infinite Peaceful and Wrathful Deities 
Of the ten directions and four times, 
Compassionate emanations embodying discriminative 
awareness and skilful means, 
Pervading the vast infinite space of reality's expanse, 
To come to this place for the sake of [all] living beings. 
The Branch of Requesting [the Deities] to be Seated 
I request that [the meditational deities] be seated, 
Here on sun, moon, and lotus cushions, 
[Symbolising] skilful means, discriminative awareness, and 
their stainless [union], 
Upon their bejewelled thrones [fashioned] in the form of lions 
and so forth, 
In [an attitude of] unblemished supreme delight, 
Within this mary~ala of pristine cognition, 
Which is the [natural] purity of phenomenal existence! 
The Branch of Paying Homage 
I bow down to the assembly of the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Conquerors, 
To the father and mother deities, and [allJ their offspring, 
[Whose essence is] the pristine cognition of Samantabhadra, 
Displayed as uncorrupted bliss in the secret womb of 
Samantabhadri. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
The Branch of Making Offerings 
I request the Peaceful and Wrathful Conquerors, the oceans of 
Those Gone to Bliss, 
To partake of these inestimable outer, inner, and secret 
offerings, 
Both those actually arrayed and those mentally emanated, 
Which are offered for the benefit of all living beings. 
The Branch of the Confession of Negativity 
I acknowledge and remorsefully confess all my negative 
obscurations 
And all my habitual tendencies of body, speech and mind, 
Beginninglessly influenced by the three poisons 
Which are the accumulating causes for [rebirth] 
Among the lower states [of suffering] in cyclic existence. 
The Branch of Sympathetic Rejoicing 
I rejoice with great delight in the [buddha] fields of supreme 
bliss, 
Where all phenomenal existence is [recognised as] the 
pervasion of reality's expanse. 
I rejoice in [all] compassionate acts, in their merits, and in 
their altruistic intention, 
And in all [deeds that are] the source of merit and pristine 
cognition. 
The Branch of Turning the Wheel of 
the [Sacred] Teachings 
I exhort the teachers throughout the fields of the ten 
directions, 
Who are as numerous as atoms, 
To stir from their meditative commitments for the sake of all 
sentient beings, 
And to turn the Wheel of the Sacred Teachings, 
Thus [entirely] pervading the reaches of space. DAILY PRACTICE 
The Branch of Requesting [the Buddhas] Not 
to Enter N irvar;a 
I beseech you all, 0 teachers, infinite buddhas without 
exception, 
To remain [present] and not to pass into nirval)a, 
And to continue to enact deeds of extensive benefit for the 
sake of beings, 
Until the world-systems of cyclic existence have been emptied! 
The Branch of the Dedication [of Merit] to the 
Unsurpassed Greater Vehicle 
[By the power of] whatever past, present and future virtues I 
accumulate, 
May all sentient beings, throughout the furthest reaches of 
space, 
Mature into worthy recipients of the unsurpassed Greater Vehicle, 
And then swiftly attain the status of the infinite Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities! 
PURIFICATION 
0¥ AJ:I H0¥ BODHICITTA MAHASUKHAJNANA DHATU AJ:l 
0¥ RULU RULU 1-10¥ BHYOI:l H0JY14 
From the field of reality's expanse, uncreated and pure, 
Within a celestial palace, which is a seminal point [of light], 
pure, unceasing, and radiant, 
Through the natural expressive power of one's own mind, 
uncontrived and empty, 
Intrinsic awareness, radiant and empty, arises in the form of 
Vajrasattva, 
[Seated] upon a bejewelled throne adorned with lotus, sun and 
moon [cushions]. 
[Vajrasattva isj white, radiant, with one face, two arms, and a 
smiling countenance; 
The right hand holds a vajra at the heart, 66 THl:. TIBETA:-i BOOK OF Till:. Ol:.AO 
[Symbolising the union] of awareness and emptiness, 
The left hand supports a bell [resting] on the hip, 
[Symbolising the union] of appearances and emptiness; 
And the head [is adorned with a garland of] perfect huddhas, 
[Representing] the five enlightened families of Those Gone to 
Bliss. 
Thus, [Vajrasattva] manifests in the form of the Buddha-body 
of Perfect Resource, 
[Exquisitely] adorned with silks and jewels, 
Seated in the posture of royal ease, 
With the right leg extended, and the left drawn in.' 
I Radiating] at the heart is the seed-syllable 110 ~1, 
Surrounded by the Hundred-syllable Mantra: 
Oryt VAJRASATTVA SAMAYAMANUPAI.AYA VAJRASATTVA 
TVENOPATI~THA D~I?HO ME BHAVA SUPO~YO ME BHAVA 
SUTO?YO ME BHAVA ANURAKTO ME BHAVA SARVASIDDHI~t 
ME PRAYACCIIA SARVAKAR.\IASU CA .ME CITTA~t SREYAI:f 
KURU H0~1 HAIIAHAHA HO BHAGAVAN SARVA TATHAGATA 
VAJRA MA ME ,\1UNCA VAJRABIIAVA MAHASA.\1AYASATTVA AI/' 
Having performed the twofold act of benefiting [self and others] 
through the emanation and reabsorption [of light from these syl­
lables], the obscurations of conceptual thought are purified. Do 
not be distracted! Recite this quintessential [mantra] of the hun­
dred sacred enlightened families as much as possible, so that the 
two obscurations may be cleansed. 
MAIN PRACTICE 
Having thus purified the [two] obscurations, one should visualise 
the assembled Peaceful and Wrathful Deities of the hundred sacred 
enlightened families as a mary9ala [of deities] within one's body, 
and pray. It is in this context that the aspirational prayers /of 
the intermediate states are recited. [The combined practice] is as 
follows: DAILY PRACTICE 6; 
Then, [maintaining the recognition of] oneself as Vajrasattva, 
In the celestial palace of one's own precious heart, 
One clearly discerns a seminal point [formed ofJ the five lights, 
Whose nature is the five pure essences [of the five elements], 
[And from this], the thirty-six peaceful buddhas7 radiantly 
manifest, 
Amidst a radiant and vibrant mai)Qala suffused by the five 
pristine cognitions, 
Their bodies composed of five lights, the unimpeded [union of] 
emptiness and radiance, 
[Seated] upon a tier of lotus, sun and moon [cushions], 
Supported by lion, elephant, horse, peacock and civaf11Civaka 
[thrones]. 
0¥ A~I HO¥ 
Within the expanse of a seminal point located at the centre of 
one's heart, 
The primordial lord, the unchanging buddha-body of light, 
Samantabhadra, the Buddha-body of Reality, blue in colour, 
And Samantabhadri, the expanse of reality, white in colour, 
Arc indivisibly united, both in the posture of meditative 
equ1pmsc, 
Seated upon lotus, sun and moon cushions, 
[Symbolising the union of] radiance and emptiness. 
To you, the supreme ancestors of the buddhas of past, present 
and future, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, M 
At that very moment, when the pure inner radiance of reality 
dawns, 
May we be welcomed by the father Samantabhadra before us, 
May we be supported by the mother Samantabhadri behind us; 
And thus [encircled} may we be guided to the indivisible level 
of Samantabhadra. 9 
0¥ AI;I HO¥ 
fin the channel centre of one's heart] is Vairocana in blissful 
union with Dhatvisvari, 
White and radiant, holding a wheel and a bell, 68 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Seated cross-legged, [symbolising the union of] radiance and 
emptiness, 
[Amidst a mass of light, radiating the pristine cognition of 
reality's expanse]. 
To you, the principal [deities] of the central Buddha Family, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam [alone] in cyclic existence [driven] by 
deep-seated delusion, 
May the Transcendent Lord Vairocana draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of reality's expanse. 
May the supreme consort [Akasa] Dhatvisvari support us from 
behind, 
And thus [encircled] may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 10 
0¥ Al:f HO¥ 
In the eastern channel branch of one's heart, 
Is Vajrasattva, in blissful[union] with Buddhalocana, 
Blue and radiant, holding a vajra and a bell, 
Seated cross-legged, [symbolising the union ofl radiance and 
emptiness, 
Amidst a mass of light radiating the mirror-like pristine 
cognition. 
To the right is white K~itigarbha, holding a seedling and a 
bell, 
To the left is white Maitreya, holding a blossoming orange 
bush and a bell, 
To the front is white Lasya, holding a mirror and a bell, 
And to the rear is white Pu~pa, holding a flower and seated 
with one leg extended and the other drawn in. 
To you, the sixfold principal and encircling [deities] of the 
Vajra Family, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, DAILY PRACTICE 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam [alone] in cyclic existence [driven] by 
deep-seated aversion, 
May the Transcendent Lord Vajrasattva draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the mirror-like pristine cognition. 
May the supreme consort Buddhalocana support us from 
behind, 
And thus [encircled] may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0¥ AJ:I HO¥ 
In the southern channel branch of one's heart, 
Is Ratnasambhava, in [blissful] union with Mamaki, 
Yell ow [and radiant], holding a jewel and a bell, 
Seated cross-legged, [symbolising the unionj of radiance and 
emptiness, 
Amidst a mass of light, radiating the pristine cognition of 
sameness. 
To the right is yellow Samantabhadra, holding a grain-sheath 
and a bell, 
To the left is yellow Akasagarbha, holding a sword and a 
bell, 
To the front is yellow Malya, holding a garland and seated 
with one leg extended and the other drawn in, 
And to the rear is yellow Dhopa, holding incense and [also] 
seated with one leg extended and the other drawn in. 
To you, the sixfold principal and encircling [deities] of the 
Ratna Family, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam [alone] in cyclic existence [driven] by 
deep-seated pride, 
May the Transcendent Lord Ratnasambhava draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE LJEALJ 
Which is the pristi1ze cognition of sameness. 
May the supreme consort Mamaki support us from behind, 
And thus {encircled} may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the leuel of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0¥ Al:l HO¥ 
In the western channel branch of one's heart, 
Is Amitabha, in blissful union with PaQC;laravasini, 
Red and radiant, holding a lotus and a bell, 
Seated cross-legged, [symbolising the union of] radiance and 
emptiness, 
Amidst a mass of light, radiating the pristine cognition of 
discernment. 
To the right is red Avalokitesvara, holding a lotus and a bell, 
To the left is red Mafijusri, holding a sword and a bell, 
To the front is red Gita, holding a gong and seated with one 
leg extended and the other drawn in, 
And to the rear is red Aloka, holding a butter lamp, and !also] 
seated with one leg extended and the other drawn in. 
To you, the sixfold principal and encircling [deities! of the 
Padma Family, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam {alone/ in cyclic existence fdriuenj by 
deep-seated attachment, 
May the Lord Transcendent Lord Amit~.ihha draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of discernment. 
May the supreme consort Pa7J4aravasini support us from 
behind, 
And thus {encircled} may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermedi.zte state, 
And be escorted to the leuel of an utterly perfected buddha. DAILY PRACTICE 
O~t AJ:I HO,';t 
In the northern channel branch of one's heart, 
Is Amoghasiddhi, in blissful union with Samayatara, 
Green and radiant, holding a crossed-vajra and a bell, 
Seated cross-legged, [symbolising the union of] radiance and 
emptiness, 
Amidst a mass of light, radiating the pristine cognition of 
accomplishment. 
To the right is green Sarvanivarar:taviskambhin, holding a 
book and a bell, 
To the left is green VajrapaQi, holding a vajra and a bell, 71 
To the front is green Gandha, holding a conch and seated with 
one leg extended and the other drawn in, 
And to the rear is green Nartl, holding a food-offering, and 
[also) seated with one leg extended and the other drawn in. 
To you, the sixfold principal and encircling [deities 1 of the 
Karma Family, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we [die and] begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And tl/e roam [alone] in cyclic existence [driven] by 
deep-seated envy, 
May the Transcendent Lord Amoghasiddhi draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
\'fhich is the pristine cognition of accomplishment. 
May the supreme consort Samayatdra support us from behind, 
And thus {encircled} may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0¥ A~l HO¥ 
In the channel branch at the eastern gate of one's heart, 
Are white ITrailokya]vijaya and A.rikusa, 
In [blissful] union, and dancing. 
In the channel branch at the southern gate of one's heart, 
Are yellow Yamantaka and Pasa, 
In lhlissful] union, and dancing. 
In the channel branch at the western gate of one's heart, 7L TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Arc red Hayagriva and Spotha, 
In [blissful] union, and dancing. 
In the channel branch at the northern gate of one's heart, 
Are green Amrtakui).Qalin and Ghal).ta, 
In [blissful] union, and dancing. 
To you, the eight emanational gatekeepers, male and female, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam {alone] in cyclic existence {driven] by 
deep-seated habitual tendencies, 
May the four Mahakrodha male gatekeepers draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the four pristine cognitions combined. 11 
May the supreme consorts, the four female gatekeepers, 
support us from behind, 
And thus [encircled] may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0¥ Al;f HO¥ 
Amidst an expanse of light in the channel branch of the energy 
centre of great bliss at one's crown, 
Within a radiant and vibrant mat;9ala, that is a lustrous white 
seminal point, 
[Stands] Sakra, sage of the god realms, white in colour, and 
playing a lute. 
May he obstruct pride, which is the entrance to rebirth in the 
god realms! 
Amidst an expanse of light in one's occipital channel, which 
resembles the horn of an ox, 12 
Within a radiant and vibrant mai).Qala, that is a lustrous green 
seminal point, 
[Stands] Vemacitra, sage of the antigods, green in colour, 
bearing armour and a weapon, 
May he obstruct envy, which is the entrance to rebirth in the 
antigod realms! DAILY PRACTICE 73 
Amidst an expanse of light in one's 'life-force' channel, which 
resembles a crystal tube, 13 
Within a radiant and vibrant mal)qala, that is a lustrous 
yellow seminal point, 
[Stands] Sakyamuni., sage of human beings, yellow in colour, 
and carrying a mendicant's staff. 
May he obstruct attachment, which is the entrance to rebirth 
in the human realms! 
Amidst an expanse of light in the energy centre of one's 
navel, 
Within a radiant and vibrant mal)cJala, that is a lustrous blue 
seminal point, 
[Stands] Sthirasirpha, sage of animals, blue in colour, and 
carrying a book. 
May he obstruct delusion, which is the entrance to rebirth in 
the animal realms! 
Amidst an expanse of light in the channel branch at one's 
bliss-sustaining secret place, 14 
Within a radiant and vibrant mal)cJala, that is a lustrous red 
seminal point, 
[Stands] Jvalamukha, sage of the anguished spirits, red in 
colour, carrying a [wish-granting] casket. 
May he obstruct miserliness, which is the entrance to rebirth 
among the anguished-spirit realms! 
Amidst an expanse of light in the energy centre at the soles of 
one's feet, 
Within a radiant and vibrant mal)<;iala, that is a lustrous black 
seminal point, 
[Stands] Yama Dharmaraja, sage of the hell beings, black in 
colour, and carrying a flame and water. 
N1ay he obstruct aversion, which is the entrance to rebirth 
among the hell realms! 
To you, the six sages, the Buddha-bodies of Emanation, 
Who act for the benefit of living beings, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 74 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of rebirth dawn, 
And we roam fa/one} in cyclic existence [driven} by 
deep-seated habitual tendencies, 
May the three sages of the higher realms draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the four pristine cognitions combined. 
May the three sages of the lower realms support us from 
behind, 
And thus fencircledj may we be rescued 
From the light paths of the six impure states [of existence/, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0~1 AI;I HO¥ 
The forty-two deities of the peaceful assembly blaze with rays 
of light: 
Radiant, vibrant, resplendent, and naturally beautiful. 
Their bodies are supple, slender, handsome, upright, and 
youthful, 
Exquisitely ornamented and [splendidly] endowed with the 
major and minor marks. 
To you, the assembled peaceful deities of the indestructible 
expanse, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam {alone/ in cyclic existence /driven} by the five 
deep-seated poisons, 
May all the peaceful male deities draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the five pristine cognitions combined. 
May the supreme female consorts, Queens of the Expanse, 
support us from behind, 
And may the male and female gatekeepers support us from the 
perimeter, 
And thus {encircled/ may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. DAILY PRACTICE 
0~1 A~l HO ~~ 
At this time when we dwell within the intermediate state of 
living, 
The forty-two assembled peaceful deities, 
Arc radiantly present within the celestial palace of our own 
hearts, 
Embodied in the form of a cluster of five-coloured lights. 
Yet, as soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 75 
This assembly of peaceful deities will emerge from our hearts, 
And fill the space before us. 
Each of the innumerable central and peripheral forms 
Will be [fully endowed \Vith] the ornaments and attire [of the 
peaceful deities],1' 
Each composed of the five-coloured lights [indicative of the 
union 1 of radiance and emptiness, 
And !encircled] by an expanse of rainbow light. 
Vibrant beaming shafts of light, indicative of the five pristine 
cognitions, 
Emanating fivd-coloured] seminal points, sounds, lights and 
rays, 
Radiant, vibrant, resplendent, clear, and naturally resonant, 
Will beam out, as if piercing our hearts. 
Concomitant with these lights of the five pristine cognitions, 
The six light paths indicative of the six classes of deluded 
impure beings will also dawn before us. 
At this moment, 0 compassionate assembly of peaceful deities, 
Blessed Transcendent Ones, Beings of Compassion, 
Do not withhold your compassion, 
But draw us fonvard on the path [of radiant light], 
w·hich is the four pristine cognitions combined, 
And draw us b<1ck from the paths [of the dull lights], 
Which are !the doors to] the six states of impure [existence]! 
0¥ Alj HO¥ 
In the celestial palace of perfect resource, within one's own 
throat, 
Amidst an expanse permeated with rainbows and lights, 
In the central channel branch of the energy centre of perfect 
resource, 
Is Padmanatesvara, the great Awareness Holder of ~1aturation, THE TIBI::TA!\i BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
Red and radiant, glowing in [an array of] five[-colouredJ 
lights, 
And embraced by the Qakini of Pristine Cognition, 
[Their union symbolising the coalescence of] bliss and 
emptiness. 
lShe holds] a blood-filled skull and a curved knife, 
Raised in the gesture of pointing to the sky. 
May the awareness holders of buddha-body protect all living 
beings! 
0~1 AJ:I HO¥ 
In the eastern channel branch of the energy centre of perfect 
resource, within one's throat, 
Is the great Awareness Holder who Abides on the Levels, 
White, radiant, smiling, and embraced by the White QakinL 
[She holds] a blood-filled skull and a curved knife, 
Raised in the gesture of pointing to the sky. 
May the awareness holders of buddha-mind protect all living 
beings! 
0¥ Al;l HO¥ 
In the southern channel branch of the energy centre of perfect 
resource, within one's throat, 
Is the great Awareness Holder with Power over the Lifespan, 
Yellow, radiant, smiling, and embraced by the Yellow QakinL 
lShe holds! a blood-filled skull and a curved knife, 
Raised in the gesture of pointing to the sky. 
May the awareness holders of buddha-attributes protect all 
living beings! 
0~1 AJ:I HO¥ 
In the western channel branch of the energy centre of perfect 
resource, within one's throat, 
Is the great Awareness Holder of the Great Seal, 
Red, radiant, smiling, and embraced by the Red QakinL 
I She holds I a blood-filled skull and a curved knife, 
Raised in the gesture of pointing to the sky. 
May the awareness holders of buddha-speech protect all living 
beings! DAILY PRACTICE 77 
0~1 AJ:l HO¥ 
In the northern channel branch of the energy centre of perfect 
resource, within one's throat, 
Is the great Awareness Holder of Spontaneous Presence, 
Green, radiant, wrathful, smiling, and embraced by the Green 
QakinL 
[She holds] a blood-filled skull and a curved knife, 
Raised in the gesture of pointing to the sky. 
~by the awareness holders of buddha-activity protect all 
living beings! 
0~1 AJ:I HO¥ 
To you, the assembly of awareness holders, the heroes and 
dakinis . ' 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At th,zt uery moment, when the uisions of the intermediate 
state of re,zlity d.mm, 
And u•e roam fa/one/ in cyclic existence [driven] by 
deep-seated habitual tendencies, 
Aiay the heroic awareness holders draw us forward, 
Le,zding us on the path of radi,mt light, 
Which is the f luminance of} spontaneously arising pristine 
cognition. 16 
May the supreme female consorts, the assembly of cjakinfs, 
support us from behind, 
And thus [encircled} may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the pure fields of the sky-farers. 
0.~1 A~l H0~1 
At this time when we dwell within the intermediate state of 
living, 
The assemblies of awareness holders, both heroes and <;fakinis, 
Arc radiantly present within the celestial palace of the energy 
centre of perfect resource within our own throats, 
Embodied in the form of a cluster of five-coloured lights. 
Yet, as soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
This divine assembly of the awareness holders will emerge 
from the throat [centre], THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
And fill the space before us. 
Amidst a plethora of musical sounds they will manifest in 
myriad dancing postures, 
Pounding and vibrating throughout all world-systems, 
[And generating] a vibrant beaming path of light, 
Indi~o:ative of spontaneously arising pristine cognition. 
Simultaneously, the [light] path of the animal realms, 
indicative of delusion, 
Will [also] dawn before us. 
0 divine assembly of awareness holders, at that moment, 
Do not withhold your compassion, 
But draw us back from the [dull-light] path, 
Which is the gateway to the deluded animal-realms, 
And draw all beings along the path [of light], 
Which is [the luminance of] spontaneously arising pristine 
cognition! 
Seize us with your compassion, 
[Ensuring] that we recognise [the characteristics of] the 
intermediate state! 
Empower us so that we may become awareness holders, 
children of the Conquerors. 
0¥ AJ:I HO¥ 
At the nown-centre of onsclf, [visualised] as Vajrasattva, 
In the celestial palace of the blazing skull, within one's brain, 
Amidst an expanse of light composed of flaming seminal 
points of rainbow-light, 
Is the assembly of blood-drinking deities, 17 standing in 
clusters. 
0¥ Al:l HO¥ 
In the central channel branch of the skull, within one's brain, 
Amidst an expanse of light, composed of flaming seminal 
points of rainbow-light, 
[Stands] Samantabhadra in the form of Mahottara Heruka. 
He has three faces: brown, white and red; and six arms: 
The three right arms brandish a vajra, a khatvanga, and a 
small drum, 
And the left hold a bell, a blood-filled skull, and a noose of 
entrails. DAILY PRACTICE 
Mahottara Heruka is joyously and indivisibly embraced by 
Krodhc5vari. 79 
May these two, the central male and female consorts, guide all 
beings [to li bcra tion]! 
0¥ A~I HO¥ 
On a throne in the central channel branch of one's skull, 
Amidst an expanse of light, composed of flaming seminal 
points of rainbow-light, 
[Stands] Vairocana in the form of Buddha Heruka. 
He has three faces: reddish brown, white and red; and six 
arms: 
The three right arms brandish a wheel, an axe, and a sword, 
And the left hold a bell, a ploughshare, and a blood-filled 
skull. 
Buddha Heruka is joyously and indivisibly embraced by 
Buddhakrodhesvari. 
May these two, the blood-drinking deities of the Sugata 
Family, guide all beings [to liberation]! 
0¥ Al:l HO¥ 
On [a throne in] the eastern channel branch of the skull, 
within one's brain, 
Amidst an expanse of light, composed of flaming seminal 
points of rainbow-light, 
[Stands] Vajrasattva in the form of Vajra Heruka. 
He has three faces: dark blue, white and red; and six arms: 
The three right arms brandish a vajra, a skull, and an axe, 
And the left hold a bell, a blood-filled skull, and a 
ploughshare. 
Vajra Heruka is joyously and indivisibly embraced by 
Va j rakrodhesvari. 
May these two, the blood-drinking deities of the Vajra Family, 
gLiide all beings [to liberation]! 
0~1 A~l HO¥ 
On [a throne in] the southern channel branch of the skull, 
within one's brain, 
Amidst an expanse of light, composed of flaming seminal 
points of rainbow-light, 8o THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THl: DEAD 
[Stands] Ratnasambhava in the form of Ratna Heruka. 
He has three faces: dark yellow, white and red; and six arms: 
The three right arms brandish a jewel, a khatv<htga, and a 
club, 
And the left hold a bell, a blood-filled skull, and a trident. 
Ratna Heruka is joyously and indivisibly embraced by 
Ra tnakrodhesvari. 
May these two, the blood-drinking deities of the Ratna Family, 
guide all beings [to liberation]! 
0¥ AJ:I HO¥ 
On [a throne in] the western channel branch of the skull, 
within one's brain, 
Amidst an expanse of light, composed of flaming seminal 
points of rainbow-light, 
[Stands] Amitabha in the form of Padma Heruka. 
He has three faces: dark red, white and blue; and six arms: 
The three right arms brandish a lotus, a khatvanga, and a 
mace, 
And the left hold a bell, a blood-filled skull, and a small drum. 
Padma Heruka is joyously and indivisibly embraced by 
Padmakrodhesvari. 
May these two, the blood-drinking deities of the Padma 
family, guide all beings [to liberation]! 
0¥ AJ:I HO¥ 
On [a throne in) the northern channel branch of the skull, 
within one's brain, 
Amidst an expanse of light, composed of flaming seminal 
points of rainbow-light, 
[Stands] Amoghasiddhi in the form of Karma Hcruka. 
He has three faces: dark green, white and red; and six arms: 
The three right arms brandish a sword, a khatvanga, and a 
mace, 
And the left hold a bell, a blood-filled skull, and a 
ploughshare. 
Karma Heruka is joyously and indivisibly embraced by 
Ka rmakrod hes va ri. 
May these two, the blood-drinking deities of the Karma 
Family, guide all beings [to liberation)! DAILY PRACTICE 
0~1 AJ:I HO¥ 
To you, the twelve central, male and female, blood-drinking 
deities, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam [alone} in cyclic existence [driven} by deep­
seated confused perceptions, 
May the conquerors, the nz~zle wrathful blood-drinking deities, 
draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the five fully perfect pristine cognitions. 
May the assembly of wrathful female deities, Queens of the 
Expanse, support us from behind, 
And thus [encircled} may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0¥ AJ:I HO¥ 
Amidst an expanse of light in the eastern channel branch of 
one's skull, 
[Stands] Gauri, white in colour, holding a human corpse 
cudgel and a skull; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the southern channel branch of 
one's skull, 
[Stands] Cauri, yellow in colour, shooting an arrow from a 
bow; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the western channel branch of 
one's skull, 
[Stands] Pramoha, red in colour, holding a crocodile 
victory-banner; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the northern channel branch of 
one's skull, 
[Stands] Yetali, black in colour, holding a vajra and a 
blood-filled skull; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the south-eastern channel branch 
of one's skull, 
[Stands] Pukkasi, red-yellow in colour, clutching and 
devouring entrails; THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Amidst an expanse of light in the south-western channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Stands] Ghasmari, green-black in colour, stirring a 
blood-filled skull with a vajra; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the north-western channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Stands] Caf!9ali, pale-yellow in colour, [clutching] a human 
corpse and eating its heart; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the north-eastern channel branch 
of one's skull, 
[Stands l Smasani, blue-black in colour, tearing apart the head 
and body of a bloated corpse. 
0¥ AI:I HO~t 
To you, the Eight Matara~, beginning with Gauri, 
[Who are embodiments! of the Ieight] classes [of 
consciousness], 1 x 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the uisions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam [alone] in cyclic existence [driven] by deep­
seated confused perceptions, 
May the four MataraiJ, beginning with Gauri, draw us 
forward, 
Leading us on the path of light, 
Which is [the vibrance of] the sounds, lights and rays [of the 
eight classes of consciousness]. 
May the four Matara~, beginning with Pukkasi, support us 
from behind, 
And thus [encircled] may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0~1 Al:l HO¥ 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer eastern channel branch 
of one's skull, 
[Stands] lion-headed Sirphamukhi, brown-black in colour, 
carrying a corpse in her mouth; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer southern channel 
branch of one's skull, DAILY PRACTICE 
[Stands] tiger-headed Vyaghrimukhi, red in colour, with her 
two arms crossed; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer western channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Standsj fox-headed Srg~llamukhi, black in colour, eating 
entrails; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer northern channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Stands] wolf-headed Svanamukhi, blue-black in colour, 
tearing apart a bloated corpse; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer south-eastern channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Stands] vulture-headed Grdhramukhi, white-yellow in colour, 
carrying a human corpse draped over her shoulder; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer south-western channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Stands] kite-headed Ka11kamukhi, red-black in colour, 
carrying a large human corpse; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer north-western channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Stands] crow-headed Kakamukhi, black in colour, 
brandishing a skull and a sword; 
Amidst an expanse of light in the outer north-eastern channel 
branch of one's skull, 
[Stands] owl-headed Ulokamukhi, dark blue in colour, 19 
holding a vajra. 
[0¥ Af:l HO~l) 
To you, the Eight Pisaci, beginning with Sirphamukhi, 
[Who arc embodiments] of the [eight] sensory objects/0 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as UN die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that z;ery moment, u:hen the z;isions of the intermediate 
state of reality daum, 
And we roam {alone] in cyclic existence fdriz;en] by deep­
seated confused perceptions, 
May the four PisJci, starting with Sil!zharnukhi, draw us 
forward, 
Leading us on the path of pure /radiant] light, 
'W'hich is the purity of the naturally manifesting eight objects 
{of consciousness]. THE Tl BET AN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
May the four Pisaci, starting with Grdhramukhi, support us 
from behind, 
And thus [encircled) may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0¥ AJ:I HO¥ 
In the channel branch at the eastern gate of the skull, within 
one's brain, 
Is horse-headed [Ankusa], white in colour, carrying an iron 
hook and a skull. 
In the channel branch at the southern gate of the skull, within 
one's brain, 
Is sow-headed [Pasa], yellow in colour, holding a noose and a 
skull. 
In the channel branch at the western gate of the skull, within 
one's brain, 
Is lion-headed [Sphota], red in colour, holding an iron chain 
and a skull. 
In the channel branch of the northern gate of the skull, within 
one's brain, 
Is snake-headed [Gharyra], green in colour, holding a bell and a 
skull.21 
To you, the four Female Gatekeepers, who are pristine 
cognition in emanational form, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam [alone} in cyclic existence [driven] by deep­
seated confused perceptions, 
May Atikusa and Pasa draw us forward, 
Obstructing the entrances to confusion through the four types 
of birth, 
And opening the doors to the four rites of pure enlightened 
activity. 
M~.zy Sphofa and Ghat.zfa support us from behind, 
And thus {encircled] may we be rescued 
From the fearsome fJassageway of the intermediate state, 
Alld be escorted to the leuel of an utterly perfected buddha. DAILY PRACTICE 
0~1 AJ:I HO~l 
In the minor channels of the eastern outer courtyard of one's 
skull, 
[Stand] the six Queens of Yoga who enact the rites of 
pacification: 
Yak-headed Nlanurak~asi, brownish white, and holding a vajra; 
Snake-headed BrahmaQI, yellowish white, and holding a lotus; 
Leopard-headed Raudri, greenish white, and holding a trident; 
Weasel-headed Vai~Qavi, bluish white, and holding a wheel; 
Brown bear-headed Kaum~1ri, reddish white, and holding a 
short pike; 
And black bear-headed IndraQI, white, and holding a noose of 
entrails. 
0 you, the six yogini from the east, who enact the rites of 
pacification, 
Perform the rites which pacify our fears of the intermediate 
state!22 
0¥ AJ:I HO~l 
In the minor channels of the southern outer courtyard of one's 
skull, 
[Stand] the six Queens of Yoga who enact the rites of 
enrichment: 
Bat-headed Vajra,-!3 yellow, and holding a razor; 
Crocodile-headed Santi, reddish yellow, and holding a vase; 
Scorpion-headed Amrta, reddish yellow, and holding a lotus; 
Hawk-headed Saumi, whitish yellow, and holding a vajra; 
fox-headed Dai)QI, greenish yellow, and holding a cudgel; 
And tiger-headed Rak~asi, blackish yellow, and drinking from 
a blood-filled skull. 
0 you, the six yogin! from the south, who enact the rites of 
enrichment, 
Perform the rites which enrich pristine cognition during the 
intermediate state!24 
o.~ Af:l HO~t 
In the minor channels of the western outer courtyard of one's 
skull, 
I Stand I the six Queens of Yoga who enact the rites of 
subjugation: 86 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Vulture-headed Bhak~asi, greenish red, and holding a club; 
Horse-headed Rati, red, and holding a human torso; 
Garu9a-headed Rudhiramadi, pale red, and holding a cudgel; 
Dog-headed Ekacarir:ti Rak~asi, red, and holding a vajra; 
Hoopoe-headed Manoharika, red, and firing an arrow from a 
bow; 
And deer-headed Siddhikari, greenish red, and holding a vase. 
0 you, the six yogini from the west, who enact the rites of 
subjugation, 
Perform the rites which assure our independence during the 
intermediate state!25 
0¥ Al;l HO¥ 
In the minor channels of the northern outer courtyard of one's 
skull, 
[Stand] the six Queens of Yoga who enact the rites of wrath: 
Wolf-headed Vayudevi, bluish green, and brandishing an 
enstgn; 
Ibex-headed Agnayi, reddish green, and holding a firebrand; 
Sow-headed Varahi, blackish green, and holding a noose of 
fangs; 
Crow-headed Camur:t9I, reddish green, and holding an infant 
human corpse; 
Elephant-headed Bhujana, blackish green, and holding a 
bloated corpse; 
And snake-headed Varur:tani, bluish green, and holding a 
noose of snakes. 
0 you, the six yogini from the north, who enact the rites of 
wrath, 
Perform the rites which utterly destroy the confused 
perceptions of the intermediate state!26 
0¥ Al;f HO¥ 
At the [outer] eastern gate of one's skull is Vajra [Mahakali], 
White, cuckoo-headed, and holding an iron hook; 
At the [outer] southern gate of one's skull is Vajra 
[ Mahachagala], 
Yellow, goat-headed, and holding a noose; 
At the [outer] western gate of one's skull is Vajra 
[Mahakumbhakarr:ti], DAILY PRACTICE 
Red, lion-headed, and holding an iron chain; 
And at the [outer] northern gate of one's skull is Vajra 
[Lambodara], 
Dark green, snake-headed, and holding a bell. 
0 you, the four female gatekeepers, Queens [of Yoga] who 
enact the emanational rites, 
Perform the rites which obstruct the doors [leading] to 
[mundane] rebirth from the intermediate state!17 
0¥ AI;I HO¥ 
To you, the Twenty-eight Isvari, Queens of Yoga, 
I bow down, make offerings, take refuge, and pray: 
As soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
At that very moment, when the visions of the intermediate 
state of reality dawn, 
And we roam [alone) in cyclic existence [driven] by deep-
seated confused perceptions, 
May the seven lsvari of the east draw us forward, 
Leading us on the path of radiant light, 
Which is fa vibrance ofj sounds, lights and rays. 
May the seven lsvari of the south support us from behind, 
May the seven Isvari of the west support us from the 
perimeter, 
And may the seven lsvarf of the north destroy [and liberate] 
our enemies, 
And thus {encircled) may we be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0~1. Al;i HO¥ 
At this time when we dwell within the intermediate state of 
living, 
The assembly of the sixty blood-drinking deities18 
Is radiantly present within the celestial palace of the skull, at 
the crown-centre, within one's brain-
Embodied in the form of a cluster of five-coloured lights. 
Yet, as soon as we die and begin to transmigrate, 
This assembly of blood-drinking deities will emerge from the 
brain, 
And appear [before us], filling the entire trichiliocosm. 88 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
[Each ofJ the central and peripheral[formsj 
Will be endowed with fearsome ornaments and attire. 
[Resounding] within an immense space, 
Vibrant with sounds, lights and rays, 
The bodily demeanour of these wrathful deities 
Will be elegant, heroic and terrifying, 
Their roar wild, murderous and awesome, 
Each blazing with compassion, wrath and fierce aversion, 
Adorned by face markings of human ash, blood, and grease;29 
Dressed in skirts of moist hide and flayed tiger skin; 
Decorated with skull garlands and wreaths of snakes; 
Resplendent in a blazing mass of fire which pounds 
With the cries of 'HA HA HO¥ PHAT strike! Slay!', 
Reverberating like a thousand peals of thunder. 
fully arrayed with hand-emblems and multifarious faces, 
Displaying the arts of transformation, 
They will pulvcrise and rock the infinite trichiliocosm. 
At that very moment when the fierce sounds, lights and rays 
Dawn before us in terrifying manifestation, 
0 you, the compassionate assembly of wrathful 
blood-drinking deities, 
0 Beings of Compassion, do not withhold your compassion at 
that [time]! 
As we roam [alone} in cyclic existence [driven} by deep-seated 
habitual tendencies, 
May the assembly of wrathful blood-drinking [deities} draw us 
forward, 
Leading us on the path of [radiant} light, 
Which is free of fear and terrifying perceptions! 
May the assembly of wrathful female deities, Queens of the 
Expanse, support us from behind! 
May the assembly of the Mataral;, Pisaci, and Female 
Gatekeepers support us from the perimeter! 
May the Eight Great Projectresses [who propel beings to 
exalted rebirths}, 
Propel us from our [mundane} states [into higher rebirth]! 
May the diverse animal-headed lsvarf eliminate all obstacles! 
May the four supreme Female Gatekeepers obstruct the 
entrance to frnundanej births; 
And thus [encircled}, may we be rescued DAILY PRACTICE 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfected buddha. 
0¥ Af:l HD~1 
When we roam alone, separated from our loved ones, 
And [myriad] images of emptiness arise, naturally manifesting, 
May the buddhas [quickly] release the power of their 
compassion, 
And may the fear of the awesome and terrifying intermediate 
state be annulled. 
When the radiant light path of pristine cognition dawns, 
May we recognise [its nature], without awe and without 
terror, 
And as the [manifold] forms of the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities arise, 
May we be fearlessly confident, and recognise [the 
characteristics of] the intermediate state. 
When we experience suffering, as the result of negative past 
actions, 
May our meditational deities utterly dispel all such misery, 
And as the natural sound of reality reverberates like a 
thousand peals of thunder, 
May [all sounds] be heard as the sacred resonance of the 
Greater Vehicle. 
When we are driven on by past actions, without a refuge, 
May the Great Compassionate One, Mahakaru1'}ika, protect 
us, 
And as we experience suffering generated by habitual 
tendencies and past actions, 
May the meditative stabilities of inner radiance and bliss 
[naturally] arise. 
May the fields30 of the five elements not rise up as a hostile 
force, 
But may we see these as the buddha fields of the five 
enlightened families!31 
By the blessing of the spiritual teachers of the oral lineage, 
By the compassion of the assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities, 
And by the force of the purity of my altruistic aspiration, 90 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE Dl:.AD 
May all the aspirational prayers, here expressed, 
Be immediately realised. 
CONCLUSION 
If one consistently perseveres in this Spiritual Practice of the Peace­
ful and Wrathful Deities, together with the recitation of the aspir­
ational prayers, even the negativity and obscurarions caused by 
past actions which involve the five inexpiable crimes will be pur­
ified. Even the very hell realms themselves [can] be stirred [by the 
power of this practice]. If this practice is followed, there is no 
doubt that one will be born as an awareness holder amongst the 
fields of the Conquerors. For it is said in the transmitted precepts 
of the Transcendent One Samantabhadra himself: 
'One who respectfully pays homage to the mar:l(Jala 
Of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities of the Magical Net, 
Will purify each and every transgression [of the commitments]. 
Even the negativity of the five inexpiable crimes will he 
purified. 
Even the hell realms themselves may be stirred !by the force of 
this practice], 
And one will become recognised as an awareness holder, 
Among the fields of the Conquerors.' 
The advantages which accrue from engaging in the SpirituJl Prac­
tice as here set down, are extremely great. It is said that just by 
simply hearing, once, the names of the deities of this mary~ala, one 
will avoid rebirth in the lower existences, and buddhahood will 
eventually be attained. Samantabhadra himself has said: 
'If anyone hears, only once, the names of these deities of the 
mai)~ala, he or she will he saved from falling into the great hells.' 
And: 
'Anyone who respectfully pays homage 
To the natural mary~ala of the Magical Net, 
Will purify each and every transgression [of the commitments]. DAILY PRACTICE 
The commitments will be repaired, and accomplishments 
attained.' 
Therefore, since the advantages of following this practice are 
beyond expression, one should persevere with this Spiritual Prac­
tice and [consistently 1 visualise one's own body as the assembly of 
the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. Thus, the supreme and common 
accomplishments will be attained in this very life; and after one 
has died, when the visions of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities 
dawn during the intermediate state of reality, one will dissolve 
indivisibly with the meditational deities, and buddhahood will be 
attained.32 Experientially cultivate this [Spiritual Practice I! Do not 
forget its words and meanings even if you were to be pursued by 
a hundred assassins. Embrace it! Hold it [to your heart]! Read it 
aloud! Comprehend it in its entirety! Keep it in mind, fully and 
accurately! 
This most lucid Spiritual Practice, which is a coalescence of 
the [full means of accomplishment of the] Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities is the experiential cultivation associated with the Liberation 
by Hearing in the Intermediate States. 33 It is the essence of the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: The Ritual Purification entitled 
N,1fural Liber,ztion of Feelings. 14 It is a supporting text to the 
Natural Liberation of Awareness: Secret Empowerment of the 
Intermediate States,35 and it is the main practice associated with 
the Reparation [of Commitrnentsj and Confession: Natural Liber­
ation of TrLZnsgressions.3
h It is the path of liberation followed by 
fortunate beings. !v1ay [the influence of] this Spiritual Practice: 
Natural Liberation of H,zbitua/ Tendencies not be exhausted until 
cyclic existence has been emptied. 
SAMA YA rgya rgya rgya dge'o 6 
Natural Liberation of Negativity and 
Obscuration through [Enactment ofl 
the Hundredfold Homage to the 
Sacred Enlightened Families CONTEXT 
This practice reinforces the previous meditation, taking the form of 
a physical prostration to each of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities 
in turn. This Hundredfold Homage can be done on its own or immedi­
ately after the practice of the Natural Liberation of Habitual Tendencies. 
It can also be practised whenever feast-offerings are performed in 
conjunction with The Natural Liberation of Feelings or whenever the 
practitioner makes offerings of incense, flowers and butter-lamps to 
the deities. 
Practitioners should make these prostrations while clearly visualis­
ing before them the form of the deity, in perfect detail, and while 
experientially cultivating the deity's nature and the inner meaning of 
the symbolism. Also, as the colophon recommends, the practitioner 
should concurrently: 'mentally admit and feel remorse for all one's 
negativities and obscurations, which have been, are being and will 
be accumulated.' Herein is contained an ancillary chapter of the LiberLZtion by Hear­
ing in the Intermediate States, 1 entitled Natural Liberation of 
Negativity and Obscuration through [Enactment off the Hundred­
fold Homage/ [which is an extract from] the Peaceful and Wrath­
ful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, /entitled/ Natural 
Liberation through [Recognition of} Enlightened Intention. 3 
I respectfully bow down to Samantabhadra and .Mahottara, 
To the assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 
And to the assembly of the hundred sacred enlightened 
families. 
Having purified all negativity and obscurations, 
May I act so as to guide all beings to the pure buddha fields! 
I [now] present this Natural Liberation of Negatiuity and Obscura­
tion through {Enactment of the Hzmdred(oldj Homage, a method 
for performing a hundredfold homage to the infinite Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities of the hundred sacred enlightened families, by 
which negativity and obscuration may be purified. Cherish your 
zeal in this [practice] throughout the three times! 
NAM0!4 
I bow down to5 Samantabhadra, the Buddha-body of Reality, 
Father of all buddhas, the natural purity of mental 
conscwusness, 
The primary buddha, unchanging body of light, 
Sky fblue], and seated in the posture of meditative equipoise. 
I bow down to Samantabhadri, the supreme consort, 
Natural purity of the sensory spectrum of phenomena/' II U ~ 0 R E D F 0 I. D H 0 :\1 A G E 
Stainless white, like crystal, 
~1other of all buddhas of past, present and future, 
Joyously embracing her consort, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Vairocana, [manifestation of] supreme 
buddha-body, 
The natural purity of the aggregate of form, 
Pure without renunciation of delusion, 
Conch [white], holding a wheel and a bell, 
[Scatcdj on an exalted throne supported by lions, 
The [resplendent] pristine cognition of reality's expanse. 
I bow down to Vajrasattva, [manifestation of] supreme 
buddha-mind, 
The natural purity of the aggregate of consciousness, 
Pure without renunciation of aversion, 
Azure [blue], holding a vajra and a bell, 
I Seated] on an exalted throne supported by elephants, 
The [resplendent] mirror-like pristine cognition. 
I bow down to Ratnasambhava, [manifestation of supreme] 
buddha attributes, 
The natural purity of the aggregate of feeling, 
Pure without renunciation of pride, 
Golden [yellow!, holding a jewel and a bell, 
[Seated I on an exalted throne supported by horses, 
The [resplendent] pristine cognition of sameness. 
I bow do\vn to Amitabha, [manifestation of] supreme 
buddha-speech, 
The natural purity of the aggregate of perceptions, 
Pure without renunciation of attachment, 
Copper [red], holding a lotus and a bell, 
[Seated] on an exalted throne supported by peacocks, 
The [resplendent] pristine cognition of discernment. 
I bow down to Amoghasiddhi, [manifestation of supreme] 
buddha activities, 97 
The natural purity of the aggregate of motivational tendencies, 
Pure without renunciation of envy, THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THE DEAD 
Turquoise [green], holding a crossed-vajra and a bell, 
[Seated] on an exalted throne supported by civan:zcivaka birds, 
The [resplendent] pristine cognition of accomplishment. 
I bow down to Dhatvisvari, the supreme consort, 
The mother of the Buddha Family, natural purity of space, 
Moonlike [white}, holding a wheel and a hell, 
Joyously embracing her consort, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Buddhalocana, the supreme consort. 
The mother of the Vajra Family, natural purity of earth, 
Beryl I blue], holding a vajra and a bell, 
Joyously embracing her consort, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Mamaki, the supreme consort, 
The mother of the Ratna Family, natural purity of water, 
Minium [orange], holding a jewel and a bell, 
Joyously embracing her consort, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to PaQc)aravasini, the supreme consort, 
The mother of the Padma Family, n3tural purity of fire, 
fire-crystal [red], holding a lotus and a bell, 
Joyously embracing her consort, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Samayatara, the supreme consort, 
The mother of the Karm3 Family, natural purity of wind, 
Sapphire [green], holding a crossed-vajra and a bell, 
Joyously embracing her consort, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to K~itigarbha, male bodhisattva who acts for the 
benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of visual consciousness, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Snow-mountain [white], holding a seedling and a bell. 
I bow down to Maitreya, male bodhisattva who acts for the 
benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of auditory consciousness, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Cloud-white, holding a blossoming orange bush and a bell. HUNDRED F 0 L D II 0 .\I AGE 99 
I bow down to Samantabhadra, male bodhisattva who acts for 
the benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of olfactory consciousness, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Amber [yellow], holding a grain-sheath and a bell. 
I bow down to Akasagarbha, male bodhisattva who acts for 
the benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of gustatory consciousness, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Burnished golden [yellow], holding a sword and a bell. 
I bow down to Avalokitesvara, male bodhisattva who acts for 
the benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of tactile consciousness, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Coral [redJ, holding a lotus and a· bell. 
I bow down to ~1anjusrikumarabhuta, male bodhisattva who 
acts for the benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of mental consciousness, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Minium [orange], holding a lily and a bell. 
I bow down to Nivara1pviskambhin, male bodhisattva who 
acts for the benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of the 'ground-of-all' consciousness, 
transcendent of renunciation, 
[Green] as the night-flowering lotus, holding a book and a 
bell. 
I bow down to Vajrapal)i, male bodhisattva who acts for the 
benefit of beings, 
The natural purity of 'defiled' consciousness, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Emerald [greenJ, holding a vajra and a bell. 
I bow down to white Lasya, [female bodhisattva] whose 
offerings f delight 1 
The eyes of [alii Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and future, IOO THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
The natural purity of visual phenomena, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Quartz [white], holding a mirror and a bell. 
I bow down to white Pu~pa, [female bodhisattva] whose 
offerings delight 
[The minds of all] Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and 
future, 
The natural purity of past conceptual thoughts, transcendent 
of renunciation, 
Pearl [white], holding a white lotus and a bell. 
I bow down to yellow Malya, [female bodhisattva] whose 
gestures delight 
[The minds of all] Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and 
future, 
The natural purity of indeterminate conceptual thoughts, 
transcendent of renunciation, 
Saffron [yellow], holding a garland and a bell. 
I bow down to yellow Dhopa, [female bodhisattva] whose 
offerings [delight] 
The noses of [all] Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and 
future, 
The natural purity of fragrance, transcendent of renunciation, 
Golden [yellow] in colour, holding sweet-smelling incense and 
a censer. 
I bow down to red Gita, [female bodhisattva] whose offerings 
[delight] 
The ears of [all] Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and future, 
The natural purity of sound, transcendent of renunciation, 
Marsh mallow [pink], and playing a lute. 
I bow down to red Aloka, [female bodhisattva] whose 
offerings [delight] 
The eyes of [all] Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and future, 
The natural purity of future conceptual thoughts, transcendent 
of renunciation, 
Lotus [pink], and holding a glowing butter lamp. H lJ N D R F. D F 0 L D II 0 .\1 A G E 
I bow down to green Gandha, [female bodhisattva] whose 
offerings [delight J 
The bodies of (all] Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and 
future, 
The natural purity of present conceptual thoughts, 
transcendent of renunciation, 
Poppy [green], holding a perfume-filled conch. 
I bow down to green Narti, [female bodhisattva] whose 
offerings [delight] 
The tongues of [all] Those Gone to Bliss, past, present and 
future, 
The natural purity of taste, transcendent of renunciation, 
Marine [green!, holding a [deliciously] nutritious 
food-offering. 
I bow down to [Trailokya-jVijaya, [male gatekeeper] whose 
wrathful presence 
Guards against obstacles at the eastern gate, 
The natural purity of eternalist views, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
White, holding a cudgel and a bell. 101 
I bow down to Yamantaka, [male gatekeeper] whose wrathful 
presence 
Guards against obstacles at the southern gate, 
The natural purity of nihilistic views, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Yellow, holding a skull-club and a bell. 
I bow down to Hayagrivaraja, [male gatekeeper] whose 
wrathful presence 
Guards against obstacles at the western gate, 
The natural purity of egotistical views, transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Red, holding an iron chain and a bell. 
I bow down to Amrtakury9alin, [male gatekeeper] whose 
wrathful presence 
Guards against obstacles at the northern gate, 102 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
The natural purity of substantialist views/ transcendent of 
renunciation, 
Green, holding a crossed-vajra and a bell. 
I bow down to Vajrankusa, [female gatekeeper] whose 
immeasurable compassion 
Guides the six classes [of beings] away from [their mundane] 
realms, 
White, holding an iron hook that attracts, 
She embraces her wrathful consort in blissful union. 
I bow down to Vajrapasa, [female gatekeeper] whose 
immeasurable loving kindness 
Acts [ceaselessly] on behalf of beings, 
Yellow, holding a noose that lassoes, 
She embraces her wrathful consort in blissful union. 
I bow down to Vajrasphota, [female gatekeeper] whose 
immeasurable sympathetic joy 
Embraces [each and every] living being, 
Red, holding an iron chain that binds, 
She embraces her wrathful consort in blissful union. 
I bow down to Vajraghar;tta, [female gatekeeper] whose 
immeasurable equanimity 
Transcends discrimination between living beings, 
Green, holding a bell that summons, 
She embraces her wrathful consort in blissful union. 
I bow down to Indrasakra, [sageJ whose emanational buddha 
form 
Acts [ceaselessly] on behalf of beings, 
The natural purity of pride, and guide of the god realms, 
White and holding a lute. 
I bow down to Vemacitra, [sage] whose emanational buddlYa 
form 
Acts [ceaselessly] on behalf of beings, 
The natural purity of envy, and guide of the antigod realms, 
Green, holding armour and a weapon. HU~DREDfOLD HOMAGE 103 
I bow down to Sakyamuni, [sage] whose emanational buddha 
form 
Acts I ceaselessly] on behalf of beings, 
The natural purity of attachment, and guide of the human 
realms, 
Yellow, holding a begging bowl and staff. 
I bow down to Sthirasirpha, [sage] whose emanational buddha 
form 
Acts [ceaselessly] on behalf of beings, 
The natural purity of delusion, and guide of the animal realms, 
Blue, and holding a book. 
I bow down to the transcendent Jvalamukha, [sagel whose 
emanational buddha form 
Acts lceasclessly] on behalf of beings, 
The natural purity of miserliness, and guide of the anguished­
spirit realms, 
Red, and holding a bejewelled casket. 
I bow down to Dharmaraja, [sage] whose emanational buddha 
form 
Acts [ceaselessly] on behalf of beings, 
The natural purity of aversion, and guide of the hell realms, 
Black, and holding a warming flame and cooling water. 
I bow down to ~1ahottara Heruka, who has three faces, 
Dark brown, white and red; and six arms: 
A vajra, kharvanga, and small drum in his right hands, 
And a bell, blood-filled skull, and noose of entrails in his left. 
I bow down to Buddha Heruka, who has three faces, 
Dark brown, white and red; and six arms: 
A wheel, axe, and sword in his right hands, 
And a bell, ploughshare, and blood-filled skull in his left. 
I bow down to Vajra Heruka, who has three faces, 
Dark blue, white and red; and six arms: 
A vajra, blood-filled skull, and axe in his right hands, 
And a bell, blood-filled skull, and ploughshare in his left. 104 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
I bow down to Ratna Heruka, who has three faces, 
Dark yellow, white and red; and six arms: 
A jewel, kharvanga, and mace in his right hands, 
And a bell, blood-filled skull, and trident in his left. 
I bow down to Padma Heruka, who has three faces, 
Dark red, white and blue; and six arms: 
A lotus, kharvanga, and cudgel in his right hands, 
And a bell, blood-filled skull, and small drum in his left. 
I bow down to Karma Heruka, who has three faces, 
Dark green, white and red; and six arms: 
A sword, kharvanga, and cudgel in his right hands, 
And a bell, blood-filled skull, and ploughshare in his left. 
I bow down to Krodhesvari, wrathful Queen of rReality's] 
Expanse, 
Dark blue, holding a vajra, 
Offering a blood-filled skull to her consort's mouth, 
She joyously embraces him, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Buddhakrodhesvari, the Buddha Queen of 
[Reality's] Expanse, 
Red-brown, holding a wheel, 
Offering a blood-filled skull to her consort's mouth, 
She joyously embraces him, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Vajrakrodhesvari, Vajra Queen of [Reality's] 
Expanse, 
Pale blue, holding a vajra, 
Offering a blood-filled skull to her consort's mouth, 
She joyously embraces him, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Ratnakrodhesvari, Ratna Queen of [Reality's] 
Expanse, 
Pale yellow, holding a jewel, 
Offering a blood-filled skull to her consort's mouth, 
She joyously embraces him, in supreme bliss. HU!>;OKEDI'OLD HOMAGE 105 
I bow down to Padmakrodhesvari, Padma Queen of [Reality's] 
Expanse, 
Pale red, holding a lotus, 
Offering a blood-filled skull to her consort's mouth, 
She joyously embraces him, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Karmakrodhesvari, Karma Queen of [Reality's] 
Expanse, 
Pale green, holding a crossed-vajra, 
Offering a blood-filled skull to her consort's mouth, 
She joyously embraces him, in supreme bliss. 
I bow down to Gaur! of the eastern direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the .Nlatarary, 
\Vrathful, white, and aloof on her throne of human corpses, 
Brandishing a human corpse as a cudgel 
To destroy the conceptual landscape of cyclic existence. 
I bow down to Cauri of the southern direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the ~1atarary, 
Wrathful, yellow, and aloof on her throne of human corpses, 
Shooting an arrow from a bow 
To bind indivisibly skilful means and discriminative 
awareness. 
I bow down to Pramoha of the western direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the Matarary, 
Wrathful, red, and aloof on her throne of human corpses, 
Holding a crocodile victory-banner 
To resist [the seductions of] cyclic existence. 
I bow down to V etali of the northern direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the -'1atarary, 
Wrathful, black,8 and aloof on her throne of human corpses, 
Holding a vajra and a blood-filled skull 
[To sustain recognition of] the unchanging reality. 
I bow down to Pukkasi of the south-eastern direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the Matarary, 106 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Wrathful, red-yellow, and aloof on her throne of human 
corpses, 
[Clutching and] devouring entrails 
To draw [sentient beings] free from the dissonant realms. 
I bow down to Ghasmari of the south-western direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the Mataral), 
Wrathful, green-black, and aloof on her throne of human 
corpses, 
Drinking blood from a skull 
To consume [the turning circle of] cyclic existence. 
I bow down to Cary<;lali of the north-western direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the Mataral), 
Wrathful, pale yellow, and aloof on her throne of human 
corpses, 
Tearing apart the head and body of a bloated corpse 
To sever erroneous thoughts [at their roots]. 
I bow down to Smasani of the north-eastern direction, 
Acting on behalf of living beings as one of the Mataral), 
Wrathful, blue-black, and aloof on her throne of human 
corpses, 
Tearing apart [the head from] a human corpse 
To sever the buttresses of cyclic existence. 
I bow down to brown-black, lion-headed Sirphamukhi, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
Carrying a corpse in her mouth, and shaking her mane 
To stir cyclic existence to its depths. 
I bow down to red, tiger-headed Vyaghrimukhi, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
With her two arms crossed, and staring with bulging eyes 
To overwhelm attachment to cyclic existence. 
I bow down to black, fox-headed Srgalamukhi, 
Actin~ on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
Brandishing a razor, and devouring lungs and a heart 
To purify dissonant mental states in their basic nature. II U I' lJ RED F 0 I. D II 0 ~1 A<..; E 
I bow down to blue-black, wolf-headed Svanamukhi, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
Tearing apart a corpse, and staring with bulging eyes 
To stir the pit of cyclic existence. 
I bow down to white-yellow, vulture-headed Grdhramukhi, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
Clawing a bloated corpse, and extracting the entrails 
To sever the three poisons from their roots. 
I bow down to red-black, kite-headed Kankamukhi, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
Carrying a bloated corpse, draped over her shoulder 
To extract l beings I from the pit of cyclic existence. 
I bow down to black, crow-headed Kakamukhi, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
Brandishing a sword, and drinking blood from a skull 
To consume and liberate dissonant mental states. 
I bow down to blue-black, owl-headed Ulukamukhi, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a Pisaci, 
Holding an iron hook,9 and carrying a blood-filled skull 
To draw [beings] free from the false mentality of cyclic 
existence. 
I bow down to horse-headed AI'1kusa at the eastern gate, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a female 
gatekeeper, 
Horse-headed, white, and holding an iron hook, 
The force of her immeasurable compassion 
Guiding [those trapped in] cyclic existence away from the 
lower realms. 
I bow down to sow-headed Pasa at the southern gate, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a female 
gatekeeper, 
Sow-headed, yellow, and holding a noose, 
The force of her immeasurable loving kindness 
Constricting the false mentality [of beings J. 107 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
I bow down to lion-headed Sphota at the western gate, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a female 
gatekeeper, 
Lion-headed, red, and holding an iron chain, 
The force of her immeasurable sympathetic joy 
Shackling the dissonant mental states generated by 
ignorance.10 
I bow down to snake-headed Garnha at the northern gate, 
Acting on behalf of living beings in the form of a female 
gatekeeper, 
Snake-headed, green, and holding a bell, 
The force of her immeasurable equanimity 
Subduing the cognitive resonances of the five poisons.11 
I bow down to the Projectress who Casts a Noose, 12 
Manifestation of the natural purity of reality, 
Clothed in flayed hides, she unites the three levels of existence 
With the [pure buddha] fields, however these may manifest, 
And casts her noose of solar rays, 
Projecting l beings of] the trichiliocosm into higher rebirths. 
I bow down to the Projectress who Casts a Pike, u 
[Holding] a blood-filled skull, and casting a pike, 
She purifies the five dissonant mental states 
To dispel permanently the diseases of conceptual thought, 
The force of her compassion, rich in skilful means, 
Projecting human beings into higher rebirths. 
I bow down to the Projectress who Rings a Bell, 14 
Holding to her heart a blood-filled skull, 
She subjugates the entire trichiliocosm 
To secure ignorant sentient beings in [reality's] expanse, 
The resonance of her charisma 
Projecting [beings of! the chiliocosm into higher rebirths. 
I bow down to the Projectress who Carries a Garu9a, 15 
Her body an exquisite white-yellow, 
[Signifying] her proficiency in the rites of pacification and 
enrichment. II UN DR En F 0 I. 0 H 0 ~~AGE 
Holding to her heart a blood-filled skull 
To overpower the five sensory desires, 
She carries a vajra and a large garuga, 
Projecting the gods into higher rebirths. 
I bow down to the Projectress who Casts a Shooting Star, 16 
Her awesome body an exquisite blue-black, 
[Holding] a vajra and casting a shooting star 
To avert the intensity of •The Great Battle',17 
She drinks blood from a skull, 
Projecting the antigods into higher rebirths. 
I bow down to the Projectress who Holds a 
Thunderbolt-garland, 18 
Her body part red and part black, 109 
[Signifying proficiency in the rites of] subjugation and wrath, 
Her facial expression fixed in domination. 
To purify and ease outer and inner obscurations, 
[She wields! a vajra and thunderbolt-garland, 
Projecting anguished spirits into higher rebirths. 
I bow down to the Projectress who Wields an Eagle-feathered 
Banner, 19 
Her body part white and part black, 
[Signifying! her proficiency in the rites of pacification and 
wrath, 
Drinking blood from a skull 
To dissolve delusion [into emptiness], 
[She holds] a vajra and wields an eagle-feathered banner, 
Projecting animals into higher rebirths. 
I bow down to the Projectress who Holds a Sword/0 
Her body part yellow and part black, 
[Signifying] her proficiency in the rites of enrichment and 
wrath, 
Drinking blood from a skull 
To dissolve the hells into emptiness, 
[She holds] a vajra and a sword, 
Projecting the hell-beings into higher rebirths. 110 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
I bow down to yak-headed Manurak~asi, 
The brownish white yogin!, holding a vajra and skull. 
I bow down to snake-headed Brahmai)I, 
The yellowish white yogini, holding a vajra and lotus. 
I bow down to leopard-headed Raudri, 
The greenish white yogini, holding a vajra and trident. 
I bow down to weasel-headed Vai~l)<lVI, 
The bluish white yogini, holding a vajra and wheel. 
I bow down to brown bear-headed Kaumari, 
The reddish white yogini, holding a vajra and pike. 
I bow down to black bear-headed Indrai)I, 
The white yogini, holding a vajra and noose of entrails. 
I bow down to bat-headed Vajra,21 
The yellow yogini, holding a jewel and razor. 
I bow down to crocodile-headed Santi, 
The reddish yellow yogini, holding a jewel and vase. 
I bow down to scorpion-headed Amrta, 
The reddish yellow yogini, holding a jewel and lotus. 
I bow down to hawk-headed Saumi, 
The whitish yellow yogini, holding a jewel and vajra. 
I bow down to fox-headed Dai)<)I, 
The greenish yellow yogini, holding a jewel and cudgel. 
I bow down to tiger-headed Rak~asi, 
The blackish yellow yogini, holding a jewel and blood-filled 
skull. 
I bow down to vulture-headed Bhak~asi, 
The greenish red yogini, holding a lotus and club. HUNDRI:.DI'OLD IIO~IAGE 
I bow down to horse-headed Ran, 
The red yogini, holding a lotus and human torso. 
I bow down to garu<)a-headed Rudhiramadi, 
The pale red yogini, holding a lotus and cudgel. 
I bow down to dog-headed Ekacarii)I, 
The red yogini, holding a lotus and vajra. 
I bow down to hoopoe-headed Manoharika, 
The red yogini, holding a lotus and a bow and arrow. 
I bow down to deer-headed Siddhikari, 
The greenish red yogini, holding a lotus and vase. 
I bow down to wolf-headed Vayudevi, 
The bluish green yogini, holding a crossed-vajra and ensign. 
I bow down to ibex-headed Agnayi, 
The reddish green yogini, holding a crossed-vajra and 
firebrand. 
I bow down to sow-headed Varahi, Ill 
The blackish green yogini, holding a crossed-vajra and a noose 
of fangs. 
I bow down to crow-headed Camui)<)i, 
The reddish green yogini, holding a crossed-vajra and an 
infant corpse. 
I bow down to elephant-headed Bhujana, 
The blackish green yogini, holding a crossed-vajra and a 
bloated corpse. 
I bow down to snake-headed VarUI);lni, 
The [bluish] green22 yogini, holding a crossed-vajra and a 
noose of snakes. 
I bow down to cuckoo-headed Vajra [Mahakali], 
The white gatekeeper, holding a vajra and iron hook. 112 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
I bow down to goat-headed Vajra [~1ahachagala], 
The yellow gatekeeper, holding a jewel and a noose. 
I bow down to lion-headed Vajra [Mahakumbhakan)I], 
The red gatekeeper, holding a lotus and an iron chain. 
I bow down to snake-headed Vajra [Lambodara], 
The blackish green gatekeeper, holding a crossed-vajra and a 
bell. 
While reciting this prayer, all the male and female yogins present 
should remove their outer garments and, as they make [successive] 
full-length prostrations, they should respectfully pay homage [to 
the deities]. While respectfully narrating this eulogy in a melodious 
voice and enacting the hundredfold homage, one should mentally 
admit and feel remorse for all one's negativities and obscurations, 
which have been, are being and will be accumulated. 
This Natural Liberation of Negativity and Obscuration is an 
extraordinary [method for] purifying obscurations, by enacting in 
full the one hundred and ten homages13 to the Peaceful and Wrath­
ful Deities. Whatever other [confessional] practices one may [gen­
erally] undertake, such as the Reparation and Confession of the 
Hells/4 the merits accrued by one who practises in this manner are 
immeasurable. Therefore, one should persevere diligently with the 
enactment of this Hundredfold Homage. 
May [the influence of this] Natural Liberation of Negativity and 
Obscuration through [Enactment of] the Hundredfold Homage 
to the Hundred Sacred Enlightened Families of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities not be exhausted until cyclic existence has been 
emptied. 
This most profound teaching is an ancillary chapter of the Liber­
ation by Hearing in the Intermediate States, a supporting text to 
the Reparation and Confession of the Hells, and a synopsis of 
the three editions [long, medium and short] of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities: The Ritual Purification {entitled Natural Libera­
tion of Feelings/. It should be propagated everywhere and enq,cted 
energetically at all times without interruption. 7 
Natural Liberation through 
Acts of Confession CONTEXT 
In addition to the experiential cultivation of the nature of the deity, 
as outlined in the previous two chapters, the act of confession plays 
an important role in purifying the negativity and obscuration that 
has, according to the Buddhist perspective, clouded our minds over 
a beginningless cycle of lifetimes. 
In Buddhist practice this process of purification, which includes 
the reparation of commitments and vows, is enhanced by the engage­
ment of the 'four antidotal powers'. In the context of this cycle of 
teachings the four powers are: 
1. The power of reliance, which here refers to the visualisation of the 
hundred Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. 
2. The power of the actual antidote, which here refers to the recitation 
of the Natural Liberation through Acts of Confession, together with 
the practice of the Hundred-syllable Mantra ofVajrasattva. 
3· The power of remorse, which is the genuinely remorseful recollec­
tion of all negative acts previously committed. 
4· The power of resolve, which is the pledge never to engage wilfully 
in such negative actions again. 
Before beginning the confessional practice, it is recommended that 
the practitioner should make actual or mentally emanated offerings 
before his or her altar. Then, each afternoon, while sitting on the 
floor in front of the altar, the practitioner should engage in this 
practice, with the palms of the hands placed together, chanting the 
words lucidly and with conviction. For as long as practitioners have 
not gained full accomplishment in the practices of this cycle of 
teachings, inappropriate negative actions of body, speech and mind 
should be continuously confessed. Herein is contained the Natural Liberation through Acts of Con­
fession, in the Presence of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 1 an 
extract from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred 
Teaching, [entitled] Natural Liberation through [Recognition ofl 
Enlightened Intention. 2 
I respectfully bow down to Samantabhadra, Mahottara, 
And the assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful Deities! 
May the degenerations [of our commitments] be purified! 
In order that the degenerations [of our commitments] may be 
naturally purified, without being renounced, the [following] Natu­
ral Liberation through Acts of Confession, in the Presence of the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, which is an extract from the Peace­
ful and Wrathful Deities: Natural Liberation through [Recognition 
ofl Enlightened Intention, is [now] presented. Be persevering in 
this regard, 0 Children of Posterity! SAMAYA! 
This [confessional practice] is presented in six parts, namely: con­
fession [in the presence] of the inexpressible truth, confession in 
the presence of the Peaceful Deities, confession in the presence of 
the Wrathful Deities, the plaintive confession of rampant egohood, 
confession in the presence of the view, and confession fin the 
presence] of all Those Gone to Bliss. ACTS OF COl"'FESSION 
PRELLv1IN ARIES 
The invitation and request for [the confessional 
field] to be present 
o~ 0, supreme buddha-body of pristine cognition, 
Even though, like the [clarity of the] waxing moon, 
You are free from conceptual elaboration in this natural 
mar:t<;lala, 117 
Your compassion [radiates to all] without bias, like the rays of 
the sun. 
Please be present here, and attend to us! 
The homage to the three buddha-bodies, which 
compose the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities 
I bow down to the three buddha-bodies of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities: 
To the Buddha-body of Reality, the inexpressible and 
unwavering discriminative awareness, 
To the supremely blissful Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, 
the lords of the five enlightened families, 
And to the Buddha-body of Emanation: extensive, 
compassionate and skilful. 
The threefold offering of [outer} phenomena, [inner} 
cloud-masses, and secret [substances] 
By arraying the vast and pure expanse of space, 
With [billowing] clouds of unsurpassed Samantabhadra-like 
offerings, 
Whether they be actually gathered together or imagined, 
We dedicate [to you] oceans of outer, inner and secret 
>fferings. 3 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
The secret offering of supreme bliss 
May [the deities] be delighted by the non-dual 'generative 
essence'4 
Whose [blissful] single savour indicates a [pristine] state, 
Where all the infinite mal)<;ialas of the conquerors, without 
exception, 
Are established, beyond conjunction or disjunction, 
In the secret womb of Samantabhadri. 
The affirmation of vows within the modality of the view 
Since the nature of mind is the great expanse of reality, 
And all things are pure atemporal inner radiance, 
This yoga is itself the inexpressible and inconceivable expanse. 
Everlastingly we bow down to the mind of enlightenment, 
Which is [the realisation of] sameness! 
The call to the assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities for attention 
Al;l In the atemporal omnipresence of the Great Perfection, 
which is Samantabhadra, 
Is [displayed] the mal)<;iala of the outer, inner, and secret 
arrays. 
Here, the expanse of male and female deities is the [natural] 
purity of mundane existence, 
And the spontaneously perfect male and female consorts are 
the [natural purity] of past and future [events]. 
All of these are centred in the 'lotus of vast space', which is 
that of [Samantabhadri], 
She who embodies the most secret and most joyous of supreme 
forms. 
Within this [space, the mal)<;iala] radiates as a supreme 
non-dual seminal point, 
And within this secret mal)<;iala, where there is no conjuncf{on 
or disjunction, 
Is [arrayed] the buddha-body of the uncontrived nucleus of 
enlightenment, free from conceptual elaboration, ACTS OF COl\FESSION 
Where the immutable deities of supreme bliss manifest in 
myriad forms. 
0, you manifold assembly of [peaceful] emanations, present 
within the indivisible expanse, 
Including the male and female [buddhas] of the five 
enlightened families, who are the Great Embodiment, 119 
The [sixteen] male and female bodhisattvas, and the six sages 
who instruct living beings, 
Along with the eight emanational gatekeepers, male and 
female; 
0, you manifold [wrathful] assembly of the emanational 
deities of pristine cognition, 
[Including] the ten male and female wrathful conquerors, 
Great and glorious [principals] of the five enlightened families, 
Who preside over the indestructible matrix of female 
[wrathful] deities, 
The [sixteen active] seals [who represent the natural 
transformation] 
Of the classes of consciousness and their objects, 
And the four gatekeepers; 
0, you twenty-eight outer and inner 9akinis and yoginis, 
Who, with motherly loving kindness and sisterly affection, 
Evaluate our good and bad [conduct], 
And inspect our commitments; 
And you oath-bound [protectors] of indestructible reality, who 
have been subjugated-
Please, [all of you], attend to us! 
CONFESSION [IN THE PRESENCE] OF 
THE INEXPRESSIBLE TRUTH 
HO~l We [aspiring] awareness holders, who are heirs to the 
~ompassionate lineage, 
Strive to cultivate the mind of enlightenment for the sake of all 
living beings. 
In order that the unsurpassed state may be attained, 
We have repeatedly received and earnestly undertaken 
[Both] the individual disciplines of the ocean-like teachings/ 120 TilE TIBETAN BOOK Ol' THF !HAD 
And the supreme vows concordant with buddha-body, speech 
and mind, including: 
The fappropriateJ commitments of [the Vehicle of] 
Indestructible Reality, 
Which are dangerous to transgress, and must be constantly 
maintained, 
Together with all the general and particular higher 
commitments. 
Yet, even though we strive neither to abandon nor to 
transgress ! these commitments], 
And we strive neither to deviate from the truth nor to allow 
our minds to fluctuate, 
Since we idly think that we have the momentary luxury to sit 
back in relaxation, 
We have not reached fulfilment and our mental energy has 
been faltering. 
We have lacked alertness, and have been overpowered by 
carelessness. 
If, therefore, under the sway of ignorance, consciously or 
unconsciously, 
Our meditation has lacked perseverance, 
And we have been distracted in our ritual service and means 
for attainment, 
We will have contradicted the injunctions of the Teacher and 
contradicted our vows. 
Further, it says in the [Buddha's] scriptures: 
'A yogin should not associate, even for a moment, with one 
whose commitments have degenerated.' 
Not being [continuously! cognisant of this, we have 
transgressed the secret approach lof the tantras], 
And [consistently] we have had difficulty discriminating 
[between worthy and unworthy associates]. 
Lacking supernormal prescience, we have failed to recognise 
those that are unworthy. 
Thus, now, with heartfelt remorse, we confess all our 
individual faults, 
Which have already become the misfortunes of this life and 
will become the obscurations of future lives. 
Whatever faults of degeneration and obscuration have tainted 
us, ACTS Of CONFE~~ION 
Whether they be our own actual degenerations or those 
acquired through association with others by: 
~lixing in assemblies with those whose [commitments] have 
degenerated, 121 
Repairing [the commitments of] those who have degenerated, 
Giving the [sacred] teachings to those who arc degenerate and 
unworthy, 
Or by committing the degenerate fault of not avoiding [the 
influence otl those who have degenerated, and so forth. 
Do not permit the retribution of the sublime [protectors] to 
fall upon us! 
Attend to us with the compassion of your loving kindness! 
And make us secure, so that we never stray from the non-dual 
expanse. 
Having inspired us to abide within the modality of 
non-referential equanimity, 
Please grant us the purity of the non-dual truth! 
In ultimate truth, inexpressible and without conceptual 
cla bora tion, 
There is no objective referent to any conceptual thought 
whatsoever. 
But if, by the power of illusion-like relative appearances, we 
should err, 
[We acknowledge this and seek your forgiveness.] 
We confess that we have deviated from the buddha-mind! 
If we have committed transgressions, please forgive our 
deviations. 
Throughout beginningless time and throughout the limits of 
cyclic existence, 
We have roamed within these turning worlds driven on by the 
forces of [ripening] past actions-
[Endlessly] drinking the poisons of dissonant states and false 
perspectives on reality. 
May The One Gone to Bliss, king among compassionate 
physicians, 
Grant the medicine of liberation, the nectar of the genuine 
teachings, 122 THE TIBETAl' BOOK OF THE DEAD 
To those [of us) who are severely afflicted by the [primal) 
disease, which is suffering! 
May all the diseases caused by bewildering dissonant states be 
pacified! 
May we be sustained in the nucleus of unsurpassed 
enlightenment! 
We take refuge in you, 0 compassionate lord of loving 
kindness! 
We confess that we have contradicted the buddha-mind! 
If we have boasted of our high view and yet not understood 
the meaning of actual reality, 
If we have not clearly visualised the meditational deity, owing 
to our meditations being excessively brief, 
Or if we have made an inadequate number of recitations or 
spoken these defectively, 
However we have deviated from the buddha-mind of the 
oceans of conquerors, 
We confess our transgressions in the presence of the Peaceful 
and Wrathful Conquerors. 
We make confession to you, 0 Compassionate Ones! 
We make confession in the presence of the entire assembly of 
the deities of pristine cognition! 
If we have failed to please our spiritual teacher, on account of 
the feebleness of our effort, 
If we have failed to be well regarded by our spiritual brothers 
and sisters, on account of the feebleness of our devotion, 
If we have divulged the oral teachings to another, on account 
of our flirtatious intentions, 
Indeed, whatever extravagances, omissions, deviations or 
mistakes we have made, 
With respect to the fundamental commitments of buddha­
body, speech and mind, 
Whilst swayed by the influence of ignorance, either consciously 
or unconsciously, 
We confess all such transgressions in the presence of the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Conquerors. 
We make confession to you, 0 Compassionate Ones! ACTS OF CONFES~.ION 
We make confession to the oceanic assembly of the 
conquerors! 1.2.3 
May all [the degenerations] that we now confess be cleansed 
and purified! 
Please grant us the purity of the non-dual truth! 
SAMAYA! 
CONFESSION IN THE PRESENCE OF THE 
PEACEFUL DEITIES, THE EMBODIMENT OF 
[THE QUIESCENT NATURE OF] REALITY 
The initial confession is that to Samantabhadra and 
Samantabhadri, the father and mother consorts 
HO~ We pray to you, father and mother, listen and attend to 
us! 
~lind and phenomena arc atemporally manifest buddhas, 
But even though this [reality] is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0 Samantabhadra and Samantabhadri, father and mother, in 
umon, 
Due to our ignorance, we have not understood this to be so. 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind 
Of you, Samantabhadra and Samantabhadri, father and 
mother, 
We seck your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Second is the confession to the five male buddhas of 
the enlightened families of the conquerors 
We pray to you, the five [male buddhas] of the enlightened 
iamilics of the conquerors, listen and attend to us! 
The five psycho-physical aggregates are atemporally manifest 
budd has, 
But even though this [reality] is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0 five [male buddhas] of the enlightened families of the 
conquerors, I 24 TilE TIBETAN BOOK Of TilE UEAU 
Due to our ignorance, we have not understood this to be so. 
For whatever ways we have contradined the buddha-mind 
Of the five !male buddhas of thel enlightened families of the 
conquerors, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Third is the confession to the fiue female buddhas of 
the enlightened fanzilies 
We pray to you, the five female buddhas of the enlightened 
families, listen and attend to us! 
The five elements are atemporally manifest buddhas, 
But even though this [reality] is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0, five female buddhas of the enlightened families, 
Due to our ignorance, we have not understood this to be so. 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind 
Of the five female buddhas of the enlightened families, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Fourth is the confession to the eight male 
bodhisattuas of the retinue 
We pray to you, the eight male bodhisattvas, listen and attend 
to us! 
The eight classes of consciousness are atemporally manifest 
budd has, 
But even though this I reality] is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0, eight male bodhisattvas, due to our ignorance, we have not 
understood this to be so. 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the eight male bodhisattvas, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Fifth is the confession to the eight female bodhisattuas 
We pray to you, the eight female bodhisattvas, listen and 
attend to us! 
The eight objects of consciousness are atemporally manifest 
budd has, ACTS OF CONFESSION 
But even though this [reality j is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0, eight female bodhisattvas, due to our ignorance, we have 
not understood this to be so. 125 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the eight female bodhisattvas, 
We seck your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Sixth is the confession to the six sages 
We pray to you, the six sages, listen and attend to us! 
The six dissonant mental states are atemporally manifest 
buddhas, 
But even though this [reality] is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0, six sages, due to our ignorance, we have not understood 
this to be so. 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the six sages, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Seventh is the confession to the four male gatekeepers 
We pray to you, the four male gatekeepers, listen and attend to 
us! 
The four immeasurable [aspirations] are atemporally manifest 
budd has, 
But even though this I reality] is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0, four male gatekeepers, due to our ignorance, we have not 
understood this to be so. 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
t:le four male gatekeepers, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Eighth is the confession to the four female gatekeepers 
We pray to you, the four female gatekeepers, listen and attend 
to us! 
The four extremes of eternalism and nihilism are atemporally 
manifest buddhas, 126 THF TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
But even though this [reality] is the expression of your 
enlightened intention, 
0, four female gatekeepers, due to our ignorance, we have not 
understood this to be so. 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the four female gatekeepers, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Then the confession should be made to the f entire array 
of the] peaceful deities in the following way: 
O¥ Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the psycho-physical 
aggregates, the sensory spectra, and their activity fields, 
Within the mary9ala of the peaceful deities. 
We seek the forgiveness of each of you, the forty-two peaceful 
deities! 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the five psycho-physical 
aggregates with the five [male buddhas] of the enlightened 
families, 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seek the forgiveness of you, the assembly of 
Sa manta bhadra! 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the five elements with the five 
female buddhas, 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seek the forgiveness of you, the assembly of Samantabhadri! 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the four classes of ACT~ OF CO;\iFl:~Sl0:-.1 
consciousness and four sense organs with the [eight] male 
bodh is a ttvas, 127 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seck the forgiveness of you, the assembly of male 
bodhisattvas! 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the four objects of 
consciousness and four times with the [eightl female bodhisattvas, 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seck the forgiveness of you, the assembly of female 
bodhisa ttvas! 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the six dissonant mental 
states with the [sixl sages, 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seek the forgiveness of you, the emanational buddha­
bodies, the six sages! 
Since our minds arc not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the four immeasurable 
(aspirations] with the [four] male gatekeepers, 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seek the forgiveness of you, the wrathful male gatekeepers! 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated the eternalist and nihilist 
[perspectives on] awareness with the [four] female gatekeepers, 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seck the forgiveness of you, the wrathful female gatekeepers! !28 THE TIBETAN BOOK Or THE DEAD 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have not correctly integrated mind and phenomena with 
Samantabhadra and Samantabhadri, the father and mother, 
And further still, our own minds, swayed by ignorance, have 
continued to be afflicted by egotism. 
We seek the forgiveness of you, Samantabhadra and 
Sa manta bhadri! 
Since our minds are not endowed with pristine cognition, 
which is intrinsic awareness, 
We have been afflicted by bewildering ignorance, 
And have been alienated from the meditational deities 
By the force of dissonant mental states and past [negative] 
actions. 
Swayed by self-deception, we have disappointed our 
teachers, 
Stirred by strong pride, we have agitated our spiritual 
brothers and sisters, 
Distracted by vanity,6 we have divulged the secret mantras, 
Gripped by miserliness, we have been untimely in the 
dedication of offerings, 
Entrapped by base friendships, we have violated the secret 
[precepts 1 of the rituals, 
Weakened by feeble yogic discipline, we have failed to 
eradicate obstructing forces. 
Thus, [our commitments) have degenerated due to either 
excessive or deficient determination and strength. 
Throughout our lives, from beginningless time until the 
present [life], 
In which we have assumed this body, 
However much negativity and non-virtuous past actions we 
have accrued, 
We seek your forgiveness for all these transgressions. 
0 you whose cognisance and knowledge spans [the three 1 
times, 
Since you are sublime beings, embrace us! 
Since we are sentient beings, we are flawed and bewildered, ACTS OF CONFESSION 129 
And, since [this separation] is an illusion, may our confession 
be granted! 
Since you are accomplished in skilful means, bestow your 
purity upon us! 
Then a renzorseful confession should be made to 
the peaceful deities as follows: 
0¥ Most precious Samantabhadra lin union], supreme 
buddha-mind, 
Even though you are our father and hold mastery over the 
three world-systems, 
And even though you are our mother and assimilate [all 
things] in the ultimate expanse, 
By conceiving of our bodies fin a mundane wayJ, we have 
dishonoured the illusory body. 
Thus our commitments have degenerated and we have grown 
truly remorseful. 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 Samantabhadra and 
Samantabhadri, mother and father! 
Most precious buddhas of the five enlightened families, 
[manifestations of] supreme buddha-mind, 
Even though you are our fathers and hold mastery over the 
three world-systems, 
And even though you are our mothers and assimilate [all 
things] in the ultimate expanse, 
By conceiving of our bodies [in a mundane way], we have 
dishonoured the illusory body. 
Thus our commitments have degenerated and we have grown 
truly remorseful. 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 father and mother buddhas of the 
five enlightened families! 
Most precious male and female bodhisattvas, [manifestations 
ofJ supreme buddha-mind, 
Even though you are our fathers and hold mastery over the 
three world-systems, 
And even though you are our mothers and assimilate [all 
things] in the ultimate expanse, 130 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
By conceiving of our bodies [in a mundane way], we have 
dishonoured the illusory body. 
Thus our commitments have degenerated and we have grown 
truly remorseful. 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 male and female bodhisattvas! 
Most precious six sages, buddha-bodies of emanation, [and 
manifestations of] supreme buddha-mind, 
Even though you hold mastery over all the sentient beings 
throughout the three world-systems, 
And even though you emancipate their respective worlds into 
the ultimate expanse, 
By conceiving of our bodies [in a mundane way], we have 
dishonoured the illusory body. 
Thus our commitments have degenerated and we have grown 
truly remorseful. 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 six sages, emanational buddha­
bodies! 
Most precious male and female gatekeepers, [manifestations 
of] supreme buddha-mind, 
Even though you are our fathers and hold mastery over the 
three world-systems, 
And even though you are our mothers and assimilate [all 
things] in the ultimate expanse, 
By conceiving of our bodies [in a mundane way], we have 
dishonoured the illusory body. 
Thus our commitments have degenerated and we have grown 
truly remorseful. 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 male and female gatekeepers! 
CONFESSION IN THE PRESENCE OF 
THE WRATHFUL DEITIES 
The confession of faults in achieving meditative 
stability in reality is as follows: 
O¥ As we have failed to liberate the egotism of the subject­
object dichotomy, ACTS Of CONFESSION 
Within the original mal)~ala of natural sameness, 
We still have not realised the non-dual truth of the abiding 
nature. 
0 non-dual Buddha-body of Reality, we seck forgiveness!7 I 3 I 
The confession of faults in achieving the meditative 
stability which illuminates all that appears is as follows: 
You open the portals which unimpededly illuminate the 
ultimate truth, 
And [naturally] arise as the Buddha-body [of Perfect 
Resource], within an expanse of radiantly clear moonlight, 
But we have let the light [emanating fromJ the seminal points 
of your 'generative essence' be diffused. 
0 Buddha-body [of Perfect Resource], which illuminates all 
that appears, we seek forgivencss!8 
The confession [of faults in achieving} the 
meditative stability of the causal basis [entailing the 
visualisation of] the tiered celestial palace and the 
seats [of the wrathful deities} is as follows: 
From the expanse of space, which is the unborn ultimate 
truth, 
There appears the buddha-body, the medium through which 
the fruitional attributes [of buddhahood] emerge. 
Yet we have not even clearly visualised this powerful celestial 
palace, 
The abode in which the supreme power [of buddha-body] is 
gradually generated. 
In the presence of the blazing celestial palace, we seek 
forgiveness! 
Confession to the five male herukas, the 
executors of buddha-body 
Though you steadfastly [appear] as buddha-bodies, sealed 
within the nature of supreme bliss, 
Holding in your hands the respective implements, emblematic 
of the six pristine cognitions, 132 THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THE DEAD 
We have not [even] achieved the experience of such [vividly] 
clear visualisation. 
0 five blood-drinking herukas, we seek forgiveness! 
Confession to their consorts, the five krodhesvarf 
0 supreme mother-consorts, conjoined indivisibly with the 
[male] buddha-bodies, 
We have let the light of your non-dual 'generative essence' be 
diffused, 
Into the 'spacious expanse', which is the lotus seed of desire. 
0 five krodhesvari deities, we seek forgiveness! 
Confession to the eight miitara~ 
0 wrathful female deities of pristine cognition, born of 
buddha-mind, 
[The natural transformation] of the eight classes of 
consciOusness, 
0 Gauri and accompanying [Mataral)], 9akinis of pristine 
cognition, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted your buddha-mind, 
0 eight matara}:l [who embody] the classes [of consciousness], 
we seek forgiveness! 
Confession to the eight pisacf 
0 Sirphamukhi and accompanying [pisaci], 
Though you remain unwavering in a compassionate and 
quiescent state, 
You emanate in blazing awesome forms, [endowed] with fangs 
and wings,9 
To pacify misconceptions and substantialist views. 
For whatever ways we have contradicted your buddha-mind, 
0 eight pisaci [who embody! the objects [of consciousness], we 
seek forgiveness! ACTS OF CO:-.;FESSION 
Confession to the four female gatekeepers 
0 four female gatekeepers, at [the portals of] the ornate 
palatial mal)qala, 
You who summon [with the hookj, bind [with the noose], 
shackle [with the chain] and insulate [with the bell], 
0 Horse-headed AI'tkusa and accompanying [female 
gatekeepers], 133 
For whatever ways we have contradicted your buddha-mind, 
0 seals of the four gatekeepers, we seek forgiveness! 
Confession to the twenty-eight fsvarf 
0 lsvarl, you who arc accomplished in the rites of 
'liberation', 10 
And hold mastery over [the judgement of] virtuous and 
non-virtuous actions, 
0 Isvari, assembly of mothers, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted your buddha-mind, 
0 oceanic expanse of mothers and sisters, we seek forgiveness! 
Confession to the awareness holders 
[0 awareness holders], though you never stray from a state of 
compassionate equipoise, 
Within the mai)Qala of spontaneously present natural 
expresswn, 
We have not achieved your [pristine] clarity of subtle 
meditative stability. 
0 you who maintain the enlightened attributes, we seek your 
forgiveness! 
Confession of one's beginningless violation of 
the commitnzents 
Throughout the bcginningless succession of our births, 
Until now, when we have assumed these, our present bodies, 
We have revolved within the worlds of rebirth, swayed by 
1gnorance, 
And however many human births we have taken, 134 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Wherever we have been born, we have engaged in all kinds of 
negative acts, 
Including the five inexpiable crimes and the five approximate 
cnmes-
Actually committing them, or inciting [others] to commit 
them, 
And even rejoicing in committing and inciting them. 
Please direct your enlightened compassion towards us! 
Grant us purification, and bestow your [spiritual] 
accomplishments upon us! 
Then the confession should be recited to the entire 
ma~zl,iala of wrathful deities, and the request for 
forgiveness made in the following way: 
H 0¥ 0 herukas of pristine cognition, natural purity of the five 
p01sons, 
[Resplendent] amidst flames blazing like the fire at the end of 
an aeon, 
United with the five krodhisvari, the great mothers of space; 
0 four inner <;iakinis, Gaur! and your partners, 
0 outer yoginis, Pukkasi and your partners, 
0 fanged clusters of devourers, Si111hamukhi and your 
partners, 
0 winged [clusters] of the intermediate directions, 
Grdhramukhi and your partners, 
0 twenty-eight ISvari, of the blazing courtyard, 
0 four female gatekeepers, who summon, bind, shackle and 
insulate11 at the four gates: 
We who have not even clearly visualised the bodies of the 
assembly of wrathful herukas, 
We who have failed to recite sufficient heart-mantras, 
And failed to stabilise [the actualisation of] the seals, 
We who have failed to offer adequate feast-and torma-
offerings, 
Request the entire assembly of wrathful deities for forgiveness! ACTS OF CONI-'E~SION 
Next, the following specific confessional prayers 
should be made to the ma1J4ala of 
the wrathful deities: 135 
o.~t Should we have broken our pledge, which is dangerous to 
transgress, 
Having earlier taken upon us this supremely secret vow, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the five families of herukas, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Should we have been obscured by conceptual grasping, 
Whilst engaged in the practices of the supreme sexual yoga, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the great mother Krodhisvaris, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 [mother] krodhesvaris! 
Should we have failed to actualisc the sacred substances and 
the seals, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the carnivorous Gauris, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 eight matara}:t, embodiments of 
the classes [of consciousness]! 
Should we have failed to array the offerings of flesh and 
blood, 11 in accordance with the textual descriptions, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the Pisacis, Sirphamukhi and her partners, 
We seck your forgiveness, 0 <;fakinis, embodiments of the 
objects [of consciousness]! 
Should we have failed to differentiate between the four gates: 
e:Jst, south, west, and north, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the female gatekeepers, the horse-headed Ari.kusa and her 
partners, 
W'e seek your forgiveness, 0 four female gatekeepers of 
pristine cognition! q6 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Should we have failed to subdue [attachment to] the six realms 
of cyclic existence, 
Having accepted [vows], which are dangerous to transgress, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the seven mothers and four sisters, u 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 eleven c,lakinis! 
Should we have allowed our resources to become exhausted 
and the first fruits of the feast-offerings to be spoiled, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the Isvari who monitor the first fruits l of the feast-offerings], 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 twenty-eight Isvari! 
Should we have failed to remain unmovingly in the sacred 
abodes, but instead engaged in [distracted] activities, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the wardens of the sacred abodes, 14 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 great wardens of the sacred 
abodes! 
Should we have failed to regard our personal [spiritual 
teacher] as our parent, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the vajra-master, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 regal vajra[-masterl! 
Should we have failed to master meditative stability, 
And failed to distinguish [the characteristics of] the Peaceful 
and Wrathful Deities, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the assistant vajra-master, 15 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 lamp of the Buddhist teachings!16 
Should we have interrupted [the stabilisation of] the seals 
through our laziness, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind tif 
the ritual officiant, 
We seck your forgiveness, 0 master of ritual activities! ACTS OF CO!'IrESSION 
Should we have failed to reach the highest criteria when 
engaged in the practices of sexual yoga, 137 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the female consorts, the embodiments of discriminative awareness, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 secret mother, consort who 
embodies awareness! 
Should we have lacked the power to maintain meditative 
stability when engaging in rites of 'liberation', 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the male 'liberating' avengers, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 [Citipati], master of 'liberating' 
a vengcrs! 17 
Should we have failed to please the buddha-mind of the 
wrathful female emanations, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the fgatekecping] messengers who summon and guide, 18 
We seck your forgiveness, 0 [female gatekeepers], who swiftly 
enact the rites! 
Should we have broken the continuous expression of love and 
affection through our laziness, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
our brothers and sisters, [our companions] on the path to 
enlightenment, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 vajra-brothcrs and sisters! 
Should we have allowed our commitments to degenerate out 
of trivial banter, 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
those [protectors] who determine the outer and inner 
[boundaries of our precepts], 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 you [protectors] who keep vigil 
over the commitments! 
Should we have consumed our resources [accumulated for the 
feast-offering], 
And allowed the first fruits of the residual offering to be 
spoiled, THE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
For whatever ways we have contradicted the buddha-mind of 
the subterranean goddesses within the outer retinue, 
We seek your forgiveness, 0 greatly compassionate ones! 
Please be patient [with us], 
And bestow your pure spiritual accomplishments upon us! 
PLAINTIVE CONFESSION OF 
RAMPANT EGOHOOD19 
0¥ 0 great compassionate and transcendent lord 
Vajrasattva, 
Whose supremely exquisite form, immaculate and white, 
Is suffused by a pure inner radiance, glowing like a hundred 
thousand suns and moons, 
[Emanating] heroic rays of light, which illuminate the 
chiliocosm, 
You who are known as the guide and teacher of the three 
levels of existence, 
The unique friend to all living beings of the three 
world -systems, 
0 lord of loving kindness, deity of compassion, please attend 
to us! 
From beginningless time, without end, I have roamed 
throughout cyclic existence -
Led astray by the momentum of my mistaken past actions and 
improper past behaviour, 
I have mistaken the path and become lost on the path. 
I regret with powerful remorse the negative past actions I have 
committed, of any kind. 
Drawn by the momentum of momentary yet violently resonant 
past acts, 
I have sunk into this ocean of suffering, the sea of cyclic 
existence. 
The fires of blazing hatred have unabatingly seared my mind, 
The dense darkness of delusion has blinded my discriminative 
awareness, ACTS Of CONFESSION 
The ocean coasts of desire have drowned my consciousness, 
The mountain of fierce pride has entombed me in the lower 
existences, 
The cruel whirlwind of envy has sucked20 me into these 
turning worlds, 
Where, entwined by the tight knot of egocentricity, 139 
I have fallen into the pit of desire, this chasm of blazing fires. 
Unbearably brutal misery has poured down on me like heavy 
ram. 
[Damaged] by such extreme and unbearable suffering, 
[Seared] by the blazing ferocious fires of my negative past 
actions, 
The shoots of my consciousness and sense faculties have been 
blunted. 
If my body, this illusory aggregate, can no longer withstand 
[all this pain I, 
How can you bear Ito witness] this, 0 Compassionate Lord of 
Loving Kindness?21 
Obscured fool [that I am, burdened by] the most negative, evil 
past acts, 
Propelled by the momentum of these past actions, 
I have taken birth as the personification of rampant egohood 
within this world-system of desire. 
I regret having taken such birth, and am dismayed by my past 
acts! 
Yet, regardless of my regret and my dismay, past actions 
cannot be re-made. 
The momentum of past actions is as strong as a river's 
inexorable flow, 
So how can the mighty river of past actions be reversed in a 
mere moment! 
All that ripens is born from one's own past actions, 
And I am one who has been swept along by the violent 
whirlwind of my past actions, 
And accordingly have roamed over countless past aeons, 
Lost within the dark prisons of cyclic existence. 
0 Lord of Loving Kindness, through the blessing of your 
compassion, 140 THE TIBETAN BOOK Or THE DEAD 
Purify the obscurations (generated by I my past actions and 
dissonant mental states, 
And secure me in the presence of your mother-like loving 
kindness! 
Here am I, continuously yearning for the sight of your 
compassionate face, 
Which shines with a luminosity like that of the sun, 
And radiates with a clarity like that of the moon. 
Yet my darkened eyes, blinded by the cataracts22 of 
beginningless ignorance, 
Are unable to see you, 
0 Lord of Living Beings, where are you [now I? 
When I am terrified by the utterly unbearable and virulent 
power of past actions, 
And my hair stands on end, out of fear, 
I call out this lament, in heartfelt passion, 
And cry out [to you] in a voice of utter despair! 
0 Lord of Loving Kindness, if you do not attend I to mel with 
compassiOn now, 
At the time of my death, when my mind and body separate, 
When I am cut off from the company of spiritual friends, and 
dragged away by Yama, 
At that time, when my relatives stay behind in the world, 
Yet I alone am led away by the power of past actions, 
At that time, I will be unprotected and without a refuge. 
So, do not on any account hesitate or delay now, 
But draw near to me at this very moment, 
And enact the wrathful rites of 'liberation'. 
Beings such as I, who are afflicted by past actions, 
Have been subject to misconceptions since beginningless rime. 
As a result, we have not achieved release from the lturning] 
states of cyclic existence. 
Indeed, beings such as I have assumed such a countless number 
of corporeal forms, 
During countless births in countless aeons, 
That if our flesh and bones were to be collected together, ACTS OF CONfESSION 
Their accumulated mass would fill this world, 
And if our pus and blood were to be collected together, 
Their accumulated mass would fill a vast ocean, 
And if the residue of our past actions were to be collected 
together, 
Their extent would be beyond conception and inexpressible. 
Though I have continued endlessly in a cycle of births and 
deaths, 
Throughout the three world-systems, 
The actions that I have committed have been pointless and 
unproductive. 
Yet, from amongst all these many countless births, 
The actions committed in the course of just a single lifetime 
Could have been worthwhile if only I had trained well, 
Pursued the path of unsurpassed enlightenment, 
And thus attained the genuine final nirval)a. 
But, swayed by the virulence of past actions and the great 
potency of dissonant mental states, 
I have assumed bodies, these networks of flesh and blood, and 
roamed throughout cyclic existence, 
Thrust into [a succession of] prison-like existences, 
Where the suffering is hard to bear. 
All my transgressions, resonant with such unbearably intense 
suffering, 
Have been born out of my own past actions. 
Please, through your great compassion, shatter the momentum 
of [these] past actions, 
And reverse the vital energy of past actions, [generated by] 
dissonant mental states! 
When, overpowered by the influence of perverse past actions 
[rooted in] fundamental ignorance, 
I wander perpetually within the darkness of unknowing, 
Why do you not release me, [suffusing me] with the lamplight 
of your pristine cognition? 
When I can no longer bear the continuing fruition of my 
transgressions and past actions, 
Why do you not embrace me with the enlightened activity of 
your great compassion? THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
When I fall into the abyss of error, 
Why do you not catch me in the palm of your swift 
compassion? 
When I am afflicted by the irresistible diseases of the three 
pmsons, 
Why do you not cure me with the medicine of your 
compassionate skilful means? 
When the fires of my suffering- the continuing maturation of 
my own past actions -blaze, 
Why do you not release a compassionate shower of cooling 
rains? 
When I sink into rhe swamp of suffering in cyclic existence, 
Why do you not draw me up with the hook of compassionate 
skilful means? 
Were I to attain the resultant [states of enlightenment], 
By training, again and again, in the three world-systems of 
cyclic existence, 
What need would there be for your sublime compassion 
then? 
Given that this [release] would be the potent inheritance of 
my [positive] past actions, 
Would there be anyone to whom I would need to express my 
gratitude? 
[But], 0 spiritual warrior, you who are endowed with the 
power of compassion, 
Since the momentum of my [negative] past actions is so 
potent, 
Do not be ineffective! Do not be indifferent! Do not be 
inactive! 
From your heart, 0 compassionate conquering deity, gaze 
upon me now! 
Draw me up from the swamp of cyclic existence! 
Lead me swiftly to the supreme level of the three buddha­
bodies. ACTS OF CONI'ES~ION 
CONFESSION IN THE PRESENCE 
OF THE VIEW 
O¥ How mistaken is the view which dualises subject and 
object, 
When the expanse of reality is free from conceptual 
elaboration! 143 
How deluded we have been by our grasping at characteristics! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of supreme 
bliss, 
Which is free from conceptual elaboration! 
How debilitating is the view which dualises good and evil, 
When Samantabhadra, [The Ever Perfect], is beyond good and 
evil! 
How pitiful we are, clinging to purity and impurity! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse, 
Which is free from the duality of good and evil! 
How mistaken is the view which sees buddhas [as great] and 
sentient beings [as small], 
When, in the state of sameness, there is neither great nor small! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
great and small! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of supreme 
bliss, which is sameness! 
How debilitating is the view which dualises this life and the next, 
When the mind of enlightenment is free from birth or death! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
birth and death! 
\Ve confess this transgression within the deathless, immutable 
expanse! 
How mistaken is the view which dualiscs form and material 
substance, 
When the supreme seminal point is free from spatial 
dimensions! THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
corners and angles! 
We confess this transgression within the supreme seminal 
point, which is all-embracing in its symmetry!23 
How mistaken is the view which dualises beginning and end, 
When the essential nature of the three times is unchanging! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
transitional processes! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of the three 
times, which is unchanging! 
How debilitating is the view which dualises cause and effect, 
When the naturally present pristine cognition arises 
effortlessly! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
effort and attainment! 
We confess this transgression within the naturally present 
expanse, which arises without effort! 
How pitiful is the view which dualises eternalism and nihilism, 
When the pristine cognition of [intrinsic] awareness is free 
from eternalism and nihilism! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
existence and non-existence! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of pristine 
cognition, which is beyond eternalism and nihilism!24 
How debilitating is the view which oscillates between biased 
positions, 
When the pure expanse of reality is free from middle and 
extremes! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
middle and extremes! 
We confess this transgression within the pure expanse of 
reality, which is free from a middle or extremes! 
How debilitating is the view which dualiscs outside and inside, 
When the celestial palace is free from inner and outer 
dimensions! ACTS OF CO:-.:FESSIO:'Ii 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy of 
spaciousness and confinement! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse [of the 
celestial palace], 
\X'hi~h is free from the duality of spaciousness and 
confinement, or of inner and outer dimensions! 
How pitiful is the view which dualises 'higher and lower' 
[approa~hes], 145 
When the sexual centre of the female consort is free from [the 
distinction between] higher and lower [energy centres]! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy 
between higher and lower l energy centres] !25 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of the 
[consort's] secret placc,26 
Which is free from [the distinction between] higher and lower! 
How debilitating is the view which dualises objects and mind, 
When the Buddha-body of Reality is free from individuated 
distinctions! 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy 
between the environment and its inhabitants! 
\Xie confess this transgression within [the expanse of] the 
Buddha-body of Reality, which is unchanging! 
How debilitating is the view which discriminates between 
individual thoughts, 
When the dynamic of the male consort acts unconstrictedly! 
How deluded we have been in clinging mistakenly to 
nominalism! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of the 
awareness holders, who are free from conceptual thoughts! 
Since pristine cognition, which is intrinsic awareness, has not 
arisen within us, 
How pitiful is this mind obscured by ignorance, 
Which grasps immaterial phenomena as materially substantive! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of natural 
pristine cognition! THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Since we have failed to understand the nature of uncreated 
truth, 
How tormented is this intellect of a bewildered being, 
Which apprehends the uncreated truth in terms of 'I' and 
'mine'! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of supreme 
bliss, which is uncreated! 
Since we have failed to mentally elucidate the nature of 
reality, · 
We have not understood that phenomenal appearances are 
illusory, 
And thereby our minds have become ·attached to material 
wealth! 
We confess this transgression within the uncreated reality, 
which ·is free from attachment! 
Since we have failed to realise that cyclic existence is free from 
inherent existence, 
We have grasped at the self-existence of things and their 
characteristics, 
And thereby sought happiness through non-virtuous 
behaviour. 
How deluded we have been in clinging to the dichotomy 
between hope and doubt! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of 
enlightenment, which is untainted! 
Since we have failed to understand the truth of sameness with 
true equanimity, 
We have mistakenly clung to the permanence of relatives and 
friends. 
How totally mistaken is this mind of ignorant people [such as 
ourselves]! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of supreme 
bliss, which is sameness! 
Since we have failed to encounter the true meaning of reality, 
We have forsaken truth and persevered in non-virtuous acts. 
We have forsaken the transmitted precepts of the Teacher and ACTS Of CONI'ESSJOI'\ 
have been deceived by the vagaries of [mundane] human 
doctrines! 147 
We confess this transgression within the expanse of supreme 
bliss, which is reality! 
Since we have failed to experience the natural liberation of 
pristine cognition, which is [intrinsic] awareness, 
We have forsaken the modality of intrinsic awareness, and 
persevered in distracted acts. 
Take pity on these sentient beings who are devoid of such 
truthful experience! 
We confess this transgression within the expanse, which is free 
from distraction! 
To the assembled deities of pristine cognition, to the protectors 
who uphold the commitments, 
And to those yogins who have fulfilled their commitments in 
accordance with the textual elucidation, 
We remorsefully confess all our own faults, 
[We remorsefully confess] all our deviations and obscurations 
generated by our unrealised view! 
CONFESSION IN THE PRESENCE OF 
ALL THOSE GONE TO BLISS 
0~1 We pray to all Those Gone to Bliss, throughout the three 
times, 
To you, the conquerors, and your retinues, 
And to all who maintain the commitments of indestructible 
reality, 
Please, each of you, attend to us! 
Having initially generated the mind [aspiring] to supreme 
enlightenment, 
In order to actualise the indestructible reality of buddha-body, 
speech and mind, 
On the enlightened plain of an accomplished awareness 
holder, THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
We have adopted numerous secret commitments, 
Relating to both the meditational deities and our 
vajra-masters, 
And we have pledged not to transgress these injunctions, to 
which we are bound, 
[for to do so J would lead to a birth in the hells, 
Driven by our past actions and misfortunes. 
[Nonetheless], swayed by attachment, aversion, delusion, 
pride, envy and so forth, 
We have continued to err: 
Should we have belittled the vajra-master in our hearts, the 
'lamp of the teaching', 
And thus allowed our commitments to degenerate, 
And should we have harboured ill will and mistaken attitudes 
Towards the vajra-companions who share our commitments, 
for !whatever! such [harm we have thus created], 
We confess all our degenerations of the commitments of 
buddha- body! 
Should we have not clearly visualised the seals of the 
meditational deity/7 
Should we have been deficient in our mantra recitations during 
our ritual service, 
Should we have failed to carry out the rites through which 
both ritual service and attainment are fulfilled, 
Especially with respect to the ritual offerings of six session [yoga J, 
And should we have been incapable of practising in 
accordance with the teachings and the texts, 
We confess all such degenerations of the commitments of 
buddha-speech! 
Should we have degraded the commitments, which the 
vajra-master imparted as an esoteric instruction of buddha-mind, 
Commitments he orally seeded in our hearts, through the grace 
of his loving kindness, 
And should we have even transgressed our secret name/x by 
divulging it carelessly, 
We confess all such degenerations of the commitments of 
buddha-mind! ACTS OF CO!'ifl:.SSIO!'i 
We [also] confess our degenerations of the ancillary 
commitments, 
Caused by our failure to realise the essential sameness of 
phenomena. 149 
We confess our degenerations of the commitments relating to 
ritual service and attainment, 
Caused by our falling into the sleep of idleness and apathy. 
We confess [each and every one of our] degenerations of the 
commitments of buddha-body, speech and mind, 
Caused by our transgressions, enacted physically, verbally and 
mentally! 
In the presence of our revered spiritual teachers, 
\X'e confess our inadequate utensils and resources. 
In the presence of the assembled meditational deities, 
We confess our prejudices towards their practices of 
visualisation. 29 
In the presence of the four classes of 9akinis, 
We confess our degenerations of our commitments and 
pledges. 
In the presence of the protectors of the [sacred] teachings, 
We confess our [tardy] torma-offerings, whether years or 
months overdue. 
In the presence of our parents of the three times, 
We confess our failure to repay their kindness. 
In the presence of our spiritual brothers and sisters, 
We confess our inadequate fervour for upholding the 
commitments. 
In the presence of the six classes of sentient beings, 
We confess the inadequacy of our compassion and altruism. 
We confess all our contradictions and degenerations: 
Those relating to the prdtimok~a vows, 
Those relating to the trainings cultivated by the 
bodhisattvas, 
And those relating to the commitments upheld by the 
awareness holders. ~0 
From now on we shall not conceal[such degenerations] 
And we resolve to guard against any and every infraction! THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
As we confess all our negative obscurations born of indulging 
in the three poisons, 
Please purify [all our obscurations] 
And grant us the supreme and common accomplishments of 
buddha-body, speech and mind! 
The Hundred-syllable Mantra [of Vajrasattva] should be recited 
[repeatedly] in conjunction with these verses and thus the con­
fession will be effected. 
This Natural Liberation through Acts of Confession in the 
Presence of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 
Which is a supporting text to the Reparation and Confession: 
Natural Liberation of Degenerations,31 is thus presented. 
Be persevering with regard to this practice, 0 Children of 
Posterity! 
May this practice be encountered by all those of the future 
who have a [positive] inheritance of past actions! 
This Natural Liberation through Acts of Confession, in the Pres­
ence of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities was extracted from the 
Tantra of Immaculate Confession by Padmakara, the preceptor of 
O<;l<;liyana. May [the influence of] this sublime teaching not be 
exhausted until all of cyclic existence is emptied! 
May virtue prevail! 
SAMAYA rgya rgya rgya! 
gter-rgya! sbas-rgya! gtad-rgya!32 
A treasure of Karma Lingpa! 8 
Natural Liberation through 
Recognition of the Visual Indications 
and Signs of Death CONTEXT 
Since the human body is regarded as an abode of deities, it is the 
responsibility of the practitioner to protect the body from the causes 
of harm, disease and premature death and to foster the conditions 
which support an active and unencumbered life up to the natural 
exhaustion of the lifespan. 
This chapter describes six categories of signs indicative of the 
time of death, together with a variety of techniques for purposefully 
eliciting specific indications of death. Also described, in the section 
titled 'Signs of Extremely Near Death', are the experiential and outer 
signs that occur during the process of dying. Lastly, the signs that 
are indicative of the nature of the future rebirth, which occur at or 
after death, are described. 
This chapter and the following chapter: Natural Liberation of Fear 
through the. Ritual Deception of Death _are inextricably interlinked. 
Should the predictive signs described in this chapter definitively arise, 
then it is expected that the appropriate practices described in the 
following chapter: Natural Liberation of Fear through the Ritual Decep­
tion of Death should be undertaken without delay. 
The sophisticated description of the process of dying, contained 
in the section 'Signs of Extremely Near Death', concurs with the 
understanding of the process of death commonly found in classical 
Buddhist literature.* This section forms a component of the Libera­
tion by Hearing (Chapter 11) and it is a vital aspect of the guidance 
to be given by a qualified spiritual teacher at the time of death. 
The predictive signs of death, however, are more idiosyncratic 
and show influences from Tibetan folklore and traditional medicine. 
Further, in terms of the predictive signs of death, it is said that the 
*For a derailed description of rhe processes of dearh, sec also H H Dalai Lama, 
Adt,ice on Dying. THE TIBETAI'i BOOK OF THE DEAD 
subtler signs described here can only be accurately recognised by 
those who are continuously engaged in meditative practice. 
The elicitation and analysis of the predictive signs is not a common 
practice today, except, in the case of certain signs, in the context of 
traditional medicine. Nonetheless, this text demonstrates a powerful 
sensitivity to impermanence and a sustained sensitivity to one's 
immediate experience. Herein is contained the Natural Liberation through [Recognition 
of) the Visual Indications and Signs of Death, 1 an extract from 
the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, 
[entitled] Natural Liberation through [Recognition of) Enlightened 
Intention. 2 
I bow down to the naturally radiant Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities, 
[Manifestations of] the three buddha-bodies! 
This natural liberation through [the recognition of] signs 
Which is a technique for analysing [the onset of] death 
Is presented as a supporting text to the Natural Liberation by 
Hearing in the Intermediate States.3 
Study it repeatedly, 0 Child of Buddha Nature. 
SAMAYA! 
INTRODUCTION 
Alas! This illusory and feeble aggregate of form, 
Created from compounded past actions and conditions, 
Like [the flame of] a butter lamp blowing in the wind, cannot 
last for ever. 4 
Nothing at all exists which is not subject to the conditioning of 
death, 
And indeed, since it is uncertain when death will occur, 
One should constantly be cognisant of the signs of [impending] 
death, 
And strive after [the accumulation of] virtue. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
There are two [primary] conditions responsible for the death 
of human beings: 
[First] untimely death and [second] death due to the [natural] 
exhaustion of the lifespan.5 
Untimely or sudden death may be averted, 
By successful application of the Ritual Deception of Death,6 
But death due to the [natural] exhaustion of the lifespan 
Is like the burning out of a butter lamp, 
So there is no way of averting this through 'ritual deception', 
And thus, [if this is indicated], one should make preparations 
to depart. 
In either case, [however], it is most important to engage in the 
following analysis. 
This teaching f on the visual indications and signs of death] 
Is presented in terms of six general topics, namely: 
External, internal, and secret signs of death, 
Signs of remote death, signs of near death, 
And, lastly, miscellaneous signs of death. 
When investigating [the time of] death, 
First one should make offerings 
To the [visualised] assemblies of spiritual teachers, 
meditational deities and c;lakinis, 
And please the protectors of the [sacred] teachings with torma­
offerings. 
Then, one should present feast-offerings to one's fellow 
practitioners, 
And also engage in charitable acts. 
Then, [the signs of] death should be examined in the following 
way. 
EXTERNAL SIGNS OF DEATH 
First, when the examination of external[signs] is made, 
It is the bodily characteristics that should be investigated, 
Because the signs of death will arise in relation to these 
l characteristics J. 
The body is composed of the four elements, SIG!'lS OF DEATH 
Thus the following portents of its demise 
Will arise prior [to the time of death]: 
Loss of appetite, dullness of the sense faculties, 
A feeling of anger which consumes body, speech and mind, 
Distracted or depressed thoughts, 157 
Disturbed dreams, character changes, and fading complexion. 
These are the portents [indicating] that life[ -threatening] 
hindrances may arise. 
More particularly, there are the following specifically physical 
signs of death:7 
If the fingernails and toenails become bloodless or lustrclcss, 
[This indicates] death after nine months, less half a day. 
If the cornea of the eyes begin to cloud over, 
[This indicates] death after five months. 
If the hair on the nape of the neck grows upwards, 
[This indicates] death after three months. 
lThen again, more generally], if one urinates, defecates and 
sneezes simultaneously, 
This too is an indication of death. 
Also, if one's urine falls in two forks, 
If one's muscles become utterly loose and flabby, 
If faeces arc excreted and semen ejaculated simultaneously, 
If one's body odour changes dramatically, 
If one's conduct changes dramatically, 
If one blushes little and one's complexion becomes pallid, 
If the tone of one's voice becomes thin, and one's eyes become 
sunken, 
If the space above the bridge of the nose becomes exfoliated, 
If the eyes do not clearly perceive forms, 
Or else if they perceive incorrectly, and so forth, 
If [the ears] do not hear, or else hear incorrectly, 
If [the nose] does not smell, or else smells incorrectly, 
If [the tongue] docs not taste, or else tastes incorrect! y, 
If the point between the eyebrows is effaced, 
Or evaporation ceases from the crown of the head, 
These [signs] may all indicate that one has fallen into the 
hands of the Lord of Death. 8 THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THE DEAD 
Furthermore, while in good health, 
[The following technique for eliciting indications can also be 
applied]: 
If, when the [closed] eyes are pressed with the fingers, 
The [minute] circles of light which appear 
Are absent from the lower part of the left eye, 
[This indicates that] one may die after six months, 
But if they are absent from the upper part [of that eye], 
One may die after three months. 
If these [same circles] are absent from the direction of the [left] 
nostril, 
[This indicates that) one may die after one month. 
If they are absent from the direction of the [left] ear, 
[This indicates that] one may die after two months. 
[Resuming this process, focusing on the right eye): 
If [the circles] are absent from the lower part of the right eye, 
One should know that one may die after ten days. 
If they are absent from the upper part [of the right eye], 
[This indicates that] one may die after five days. 
If they are absent from the direction of the [right] ear, 
[This indicates that one may dieJ after three days; 
And if they are absent from the direction of the [right] nostril, 
One should know that one may die after two days, even if one 
is not sick. 
Secondly, if when the ears are cupped with the fingers, 
No humming sound is heard throughout an entire day,9 
One should know that one might die after six years. 
If it is absent for two days, 
One may die after six years less two months. 
Similarly, for each additional day [that the sound is absent], 
[This indicates that! one may die, decrementally, after three 
fewer months. 
That is, if [the sound] is absent for a third or fourth day, 
Death may come after three [or six] fewer months, 
respectively. 
It has also been said that the number of days [indicated] might 
not necessarily be definite. SIGN~ Of DEATH 
There are also other [external] signs of death, such as: 
If one feels [continuously] angry and short-tempered, 
If one feels fearful, wherever one may be, 
If one's positive perspective, devotion, and similar qualities 
ebb away, 
If one feels a version towards saintly beings, 159 
If one feels depressed, wherever one may be, and [constantly] 
wishes to go [elsewhere], 
If one wishes to be separated from sympathetic Buddhist 
compamons, 
If one delights in the social diversions and distracting activities 
of cyclic existence, 
Or if one feels excessive attachment, aversion, pride, or envy, 
These may all indicate that one has fallen into the hands of the 
Lord of Death. 
These, [the above], are called 'the external signs of death', 
Which, it is said, can be averted by the ritual deception of 
death. 
The techniques, by which they are averted, should be studied, 
By referring to the Ritual Deception of Death [chapter, which 
follows]. 
INTERNAL SIGNS OF DEATH 
The investigation of the internal signs of death 
Comprises the examination of vital breath and the 
examination of dreams. 
Examination of the Vital Breath 10 
Around the time of the [vernal or autumnal] equinox, 
At daybreak on the first day l of the lunar month], 
One should sit upright, with the body in the seven-point 
posture of Vairocana. 
Then, one should observe the vital breath, and note from 
which [nostril] this emerges. 
If, at this time, the vital breath is moving through the left 
nostril, 160 THE TIBETAN BOOK Or THE DEAD 
Then, for a period of three days, the breath will continue to 
move exclusively through the left nostril, 
But then on the fourth day it will change, 
And proceed to move through the right nostril for three days. 
Thus it will alternate in this way every three days between the 
two nostrils. 
[Observe this process and] count the number of days 
diligently, and do not make a mistake. 
If no error is made [in the counting], and if the breath moves 
successively in this way, 
And then begins to move erratically after one and a half 
months, 
It is said that one may die after [a further] six months. 
If the breath begins to move erratically after one month, 
It is said that severe misfortunes may occur. 
If it begins to move erratically after two weeks, 
[It is said that] serious illness may occur. 
If it moves erratically after five days, 11 
[It is said that] slander and calumny may occur. 
If [the breath] does not alternate [from one nostril to the 
other] over a ten-day period, 
Then, as soon as it docs change, one may die. 
If it moves simultaneously through both nostrils and the 
mouth, 
[This indicates that] one may die after half a day. 
And if it ceases to move through the nose and instead moves 
only through the mouth, 
It is said that one will die immediately. 
Examination of the Signs of Death which 
Occur in Dreams12 
[First, one should know that] those dreams which occur in the 
late evening or around midnight are unreliable, 
But if one dreams between dawn and daybreak that: 
One is riding a cat or a white monkey with a red face, 
While moving further and further towards the east, 
It is saiJ that this is a sign of death caused by king spirits.13 
If one Jrcams of riding a tiger, fox, or corpse, SIG~S OF DEATH I6I 
Or of riding a buffalo, pig, camel, or donkey, 
While moving further and further towards the south, 
This is a sign of death [indicating that] one has fallen into the 
hands of Yama. 
Furthermore, if one dreams of eating faeces, 
Of wearing black clothes of yak hair, while plunging 
downwards, 
Of being trapped in a wicker-basket or snare, 
Of being bound with iron chains, 
Or of copulating repeatedly with a black figure or animal, 
These are [also! signs [which arc indicative] of death. 
If one dreams of being disembowelled by a fierce black 
woman, 
And that one's entrails arc spilling out, 
Or that a black man arrives, wielding an iron mace, 
And coming into one's presence, he tells you to depart, 
Or [if one dreams! that one is being dragged along by a black 
rope attached to the neck, 
Or that one is inside a lofty red-coloured castle, 
Surrounded by a moat and perimeter wall, 
Or [if one dreams] of being decapitated and having one's head 
carried off by another, 
Or of being surrounded by crows, anguished spirits, or 
villains, 
Or of being willingly led away, or leaving [home] in a bridal 
processiOn, 
Of being naked, with one's hair cut off and beard shaved, 
Of constantly associating with friends who have died, 
Of being dragged along by a crowd of dead people, 
Of jumping into water, sinking into mud, or being swallowed 
b:: fish, 
Of entering a womb and falling asleep, 
Of being overcome in a battle, in which the other side is 
victorious, 
Of wearing red clothing, and being adorned with red 
garlands, 
Of repeatedly picking red flowers, 
Of climbing a mountain of red shellac, THE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
Of having one's head wrapped in a red silk turban, 
Of twigs growing on the crown of your head, and birds 
nesting there, 
Of falling asleep repeatedly in a terrifying charnel ground, 
Of being old, and carrying a heavy burden, 
Of the sun and moon falling to the plains, leaving one 
shrouded in darkness, 
Of jumping headlong into a pit, 
Of dancing together with a host of ogres, 
Or setting out, thinking one will roam to unfamiliar distant 
lands, never to return -
If such dreams and others like them occur when one is not 
sick, they are indefinite [with respect to the time of death], 
And one may be released [from their indications] by means of 
the [appropriate] ritual service. 
If, however, such dreams continually recur, 
[This indicates that) one will die within a year. 
If one should dream of the sun and moon being eclipsed, 
Falling to the plains, or repeatedly setting, 
One's father, mother, or teacher may die, 
And it is said that if they are sick at the time, 
Their death will be inevitable. 
The above are called the 'internal signs of death', 
Which are slightly more difficult [to avert] 
Through ritual deception than the aforementioned [external 
signs]. 
SECRET SIGNS OF DEATH 
The secret signs of death will[now] be described. 
When the external and internal signs of death occur, 
They can be averted by repeatedly performing the Ritual 
Deception of Death. 
If, however, the external and internal signs are not 
l successfully] reversed, 
One should then examine the secret signs in the following way: SIG:SS OF DEATH 
Having first generated the mind [aspiring] to supreme 
enlightenment, 14 
And then taken refuge and offered prayers, 
One should examine, on the morning of the first day of the 
month, 
The flow of one's semen or menstrual blood. 
It is said that if the semen of a man is blackish yellow, 
Or if the menstrual blood of a woman is whitish, 
Death may occur after two months. 
If the semen of a man is reddish, 
He may die or be subjected to slander after six months. 
However, if its [natural] whiteness is undiminished, 
[This indicates that] there is no obstacle [to life], 
And [the semenJ should be inhaled through the nose, while it is 
still warm. 
This is itself a rite associated with the Ritual Deception of Death. 
Furthermore, if semen flows without any [blissful! sensation, 
And it is interspersed with quicksilver-like globules, the size of 
sesame seeds, 
It is said that one will die [imminently]. 
If the flow of a \Voman's menstrual blood is unceasing, 
And if at that time she dreams she is picking red flowers, 
[This indicates that] death will [soon] follow. 
!\1oreover, if a man has continual spermatorrhoea, 
Even when not engaged in sexual intercourse, 
It is said that he may die after four months. 
If a black mole suddenly appears for the first time, 
At the orifice of the glans penis, 
Or if one has an undistracted and constant [sexual] desire, 
thinking only of women, 
And one allows one's commitments in respect of the third 
empowerment to degenerate, 1.s 
These are not only signs of death, 
But also omens that one will later proceed to [rebirth in] the 
indestructible hells. 
[Therefore], if one docs not confess [and repair] these 
[degenerations] fully, 
One will experience the fierce sufferings of the hells. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF Till·. UFAl> 
In order for the confession to be effective, however, 
You should perform the ritual deception pertaining to the 
secret [signs of] death, 
Yet [ de;Hh] will be harder to deceive than in the rwo preceding 
categories. 
The above are called the 'secret signs of death'. 
SIGNS OF REMOTE DEATH 
The examination of the signs of death when it is [still] years or 
months away 
Should be made by scrutinising the 'shadow of one's lifespan', 
Optically projected onto the sky, in the way described below. 
[These indications may show that] one will die, or that one 
will not die, 
And that the averting [of death] will be possible, or 
impossible.16 
[To begin], offerings should be made to the spiritual teacher, 
and the Three Precious Jewels, 
Torma-offerings should be presented to the <;iakinis and 
protectors of the [sacred] teachings; 
And then, after going for refuge and offering prayers, 
The examination should be made [as follows]: 
In an isolated and delightful place, 
In the morning or afternoon of the first day of the month, 
Or in the evening or at dawn of the fifteenth day,1-
When the sky is clear and there is no wind, 
One should sit naked in a comfortable spot, 
And there, after praying fervently, 
One should repeat the following mantra one hundred times: 
0¥ AYU~E SA¥HARAKESVARE HO~t PHAT11
~ 
Then, standing up, naked, one should bow down seven times 
To each of the gods of the [ten] directions, 
And then, directly stretching out one's four limbs, 
\X'hile holding in one's hand a rosary or suitable symbolic 
lund-implement, 1
'~ SIG!"S OF DEATH 
One should inscribe the letter A on the heart of one's 
shadow.20 
[Next], without blinking, one should gaze fixedly at the letter 
A [drawn] at the heart [of the shadow], 
And focus one's awareness upon [the letter A]. 
Then, once the eyes have grown numb [through strain], 
One should look up into the centre of the cloudless sky, 
At \vhich time one's own form should become visible in the 
sky. 
One should then know that if the head and body of this 
[reflected image] are intact, and [the image] is pale in colour, 
This is an auspicious sign that there will be no obstacles and 
that one will not die [imminently]. 
If one's reflected image is not visible in the sky, 
[First], perform the rite for affirmation of vows, 
And, while sitting in the 'indestructible cross-legged posture', 
With the hands in the 'gesture of meditative equipoise'/1 
Look [for the image again], in the above manner. 
If [one's reflected image] still does not appear, 
It may not be significant, as it may have been obscured by 
clouds or atmospheric winds, 
In which case, the examination should be postponed until the 
sky is clear. 
[When the reflected image does become visible, however,] 
Its examination entails three considerations: of completeness, 
shape, and colour. 
First, the completeness [of the reflected image] should be 
examined as follows: 
When [assessing] the completeness of the image 
In relation to the number of years [one is yet to live], 
If the hand-held implement is missing, 
This [indication] is called the 'separation from the deity on 
whom one has relied', 22 
And it indicates that one's life may end in seven years' time. 
If the right hand is missing, 
[This indicates that] one may die after five years. 
If the left hand is missing, 
[This indicates that] one may die after three years. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
If the right leg is missing below the knee, 
One may die after two years. 
If the left leg is missing, 
[This indicates that] one may die after one year. 
Next, when [assessing] the completeness [of the image] 
In relation to the number of months [one is yet to live]: 
If the right part of the head is missing, 
One may die after nine months. 
If the left part of the head is missing, 
One may die after seven months. 
If the head is missing above the neck, 
One may die after five months. 
If the head and the neck are both missing, 
One may die after three months. 
If the upper trunk is missing, 
One may die after two months. 
If the lower trunk is missing, 
One may die after one month. 
Next, when [assessing] the completeness [of the image] 
In relation to the number of days [one is yet to live]: 
If the right side of the body is missing, 
One may die in twenty-nine days. 
If the left side l of the body] is missing, 
One may die in twenty-one days. 
Second, the [overall] shape [of the image] should be examined 
as follows: 
If [the image] is square, one may die after five months. 
If it is round, one may die after four months. 
If it is semicircular, one may die after three months, 
And if it is oblong, one may die after two months. 
In all these cases, death may be averted by ritual deception. 
However, if it is triangular, one will die after one month. 
If it resembles a bundled corpse, one will die after half a 
month. 
If it is upside down,21 one will die after ten days. 
In these last three cases, death cannot be averted and is 
absolutely inevitable. SIG:-;s OF DEATH 
Third, the colour [of the image] should be examined as 
follows: 
If it is white in colour, and fades from the centre, 
This is a sign that one has displeased serpentine water spirits, 
king spirits, and gods. 
If it is black in colour, and fades from the right, 
This is a sign that one has been overwhelmed by beguiling 
forces and imprecatory female spirits. 
If it is red in colour, and fades from the left, 
This is a sign that one has been seized by martial haunting 
spirits, and by one's own lifelong companion gods, 
Or else that one will encounter woundings and diseases. 
If it is yellow in colour, and fades from the head, 
This is a sign that one has been seized by serpentine water 
spirits, king spirits and bewitchers. 
If it is blue in colour, and fades from the legs, 
This is a sign that one has been seized by serpentine water 
spirits and lake-dwelling medicinal spirits. 
If it is hazy and diffuse, 
This is a sign that one has been seized by imprecatory female 
spirits and the acolytes of Yama. 
If it appears yellowish and uneven, 
[This is a sign that one has been seized] by the spirit lords of 
the soil. 
If it is garish, irregular, and variegated, 
[This indicates that] one has been seized by the eight classes of 
spirits, 
Comprising the diverse beguiling forces of death. 
All these arc [the signs] recognised with respect to the colours 
[of the reflected image]. 
When any of the above signs of death occur, 
One should persevere with [the practices set down in] the 
Ritual Deception of Death, 
And then re-examine [the imagcJ, in the manner described 
above. 
If the limbs are complete, 
[Death] may be ritually deceived. 
But if the ritual deception of death fails to be effective, even 
after being applied three times, 168 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
This is a sign that the time has come for one's life to end. 
Therefore, those of highest [potential] should maintain the 
v1ew, 
Which accords with the profound abiding nature [of reality],24 
Those of average [potential] should meditate on the 
meditational deity, according to the generation and perfection 
stages, 
And those of lowest [potential] should persevere with the 
accumulation [of merit]. 
The above is the analysis of the reflected image in the sky. 
SIGNS OF NEAR DEATH 
The analysis of the signs of near death is now presented. 
The examination of [the signs] described so far should be 
made when one is in good health, 
For [at that time] there are [still] many possibilities [for 
recovery], because the signs of a remote death can be ritually 
deceived. 
Here, however, with regard to a sick person, 
The signs indicative of [near] death arise as follows: 
If one's gums grow grimy and black, 
This is called the 'gathering of the personal demons of the 
elements', 
And it indicates that one may die after nine days. 
If the nostrils sag inwards and deflate, 
This is called the 'blockage of the passageway of the vital 
breath', 
And it indicates that one may die after nine days. 
If the limbs are subject to repeated fits of expansion and 
contraction, 
This is called the 'scaling of the mountain of the elements', 
And it indicates that one may die after five days. 
If the eyes stare fixedly, without blinking, 
This is called the 'escape of the mother-like vital breath',25 
And it indicates that one may die after three days. 
If the cheeks sag in\vards, SIG!\S OF DEATII 
This is called the 'rupture of the edge of the earth element', 
And it indicates that one may die at daybreak, ten days later. 
If breathing is repeatedly agitated, 
This is called the 'collision of vital energy and mind', 
And it indicates that one may die after six days.26 
If the tip of the nose inclines to the right or left, 
This is called the 'cutting off of the bridge of the nose', 
And it indicates that one may die after seven days. 
If tears flow uncontrollably from the eyes, 
This is called the 'impediment', 
And it indicates that one may die after five days. 
If the right or left cheek sags inwards, 
This is called the 'cutting off of the intervening muscle', 
And it indicates that [one may dieJ after one day. 
If the upper and lower teeth become locked, 
This is called the 'blockage of the path of the elements', 
And it indicates that one may die after two and a half days. 
If a black spot appears on the tongue, 
It is certain that one will die after two days. 
If the ears lie flat against the head, 
This is called the 'blockage of the stairway of the cars', 
And it indicates that one may die within half a day. 
If the xiphoid of the chest sags inward, 
This is called the 'rupture of the support of the water 
element', 
And it indicates that one may die after two weeks. 
If the hands shake for a prolonged time, when standing or 
sitting, 
One should know that one may quickly die. 
Other signs of [ncar] death should also be examined in the 
following way: 
At noun one should face towards the south, 
Placing the elbows on the knees, 
Whereupon, lifting up one's hand, 
One should place [the wrist] at the point between the 
eyebrows, 
And focus both eyes upon one's hand. 
[The image of the arm] will appear very thin, and if it then 
vanishes, 170 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
This is called the 'severing of the bond between atmosphere 
and earth', 
And it indicates that one may die after nineteen days. 
[Or else, one should position oneself at sunrise] with a pool or 
pond to the east, 
And stand up and gaze at the surface of a wall towards the 
west. 
Two superimposed shadows will appear, one above the other, 
And if the upper shadow disappears, 
This is called the 'fall of a rider on a white lioness from the 
slopes of .Mount Sumeru', 
And it indicates that one may die after fifteen and a half days. 
[Alternatively, one should examine irregularities in one's urine 
specimen):27 
In the morning after a night when one has not engaged in 
sexual intercourse, 
Drunk alcohol, or talked excessively, 
One should fill a clay container with one's [first] urine, at 
sunrise, and examine it. 
If [the urine] has a bluish or reddish vapour which then 
disappears, 
This is called the 'vanishing of the froth of the ocean', 
And it indicates that one will certainly die after nine days. 
If the vapour is blackish and putrid, 
[This indicates that] one will die after one day. 
If the vapour is red and spotted, one may die after nine [days]. 
[Alternatively], one should defecate at sunrise, 
And if no vapour arises from [the faeces], 
This is called the 'ceasing of monks' smoke in the cities of the 
earth element', 
And it indicates that one may die after nine days. 
[Further], if, when the [closed] eyes are pressed, no circles of 
light appear, 
This is called the 'setting of the unchanging sun at the summit 
of :Vlount Sumeru', 28 
And it indicates that one may die after three or seven days. SIGN'> OF OEATH 
[Further], if, when the ears arc cupped with the fingers, 
The humming sound which is [normally] present is absent, 
This is l:alled the 'interruption of the natural sound of the 
4akinis from within Mount Sumeru'/9 I7I 
And it indicates that one may die after seven or thirteen days. 
[Alternatively], on a morning when the sun is shining, 
One should turn one's back to the sun, 
And if no evaporation [is seen to] rise from the crown of one's 
shadow, 
This is called the 'rupturing of the Wish-granting Tree from 
the Summit of Mount Sumeru'/0 
And it indicates that one may die after five days. 
[Also], if a single tuft of hair exceptionally rises upwards from 
the posterior fontanelles, 
This is called 'the black lord of death, one-legged Yavati, 
arising as an enemy against the Wish-granting Tree',31 
And it indicates that one may die after seven days. 
\X'hichevcr of these [signs of] death occur, 
They indicate the spel:ific time-frame [of impending death]. 
Therefore, upon the occurrence of such [signs], the Ritual 
Deception of Death should be performed three times. 
If this is carried out [successfully], untimely death will be 
averted. 
One should [therefore I exert oneself and persevere in 
[applying] the practical instructions, 
As [taught I in the Natural Liberation of Fear through the 
Ritual Deception of Death. 
But if the ritual deception does not take effect, 
Despite being performed on three occasions, 
Death is definite, for one's lifespan is at its end. 
MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS OF DEATH32 
Here follows the presentation of the miscellaneous signs of 
death. 
Regardless of whether one is sick or healthy, 172 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
If one cannot see the point of the nose with the eyes, 
One may die after five months. 
If one cannot see the tip of one's own tongue, 
One may die after three days even if one is not sick. 
If, when one gazes at the surface of a clear mirror, 
One cannot see with one's left eye, one may die after seven 
months. 
[Usually], when one breathes into the palm of one's own hand 
[from dose byj, it will feel warm, 
And when one does so [from a distance] it will feel cold, 
But if these [sensations] are reversed, 
One should know that one might die after ten days. 
If, when one looks for one's reflection in a vessel filled with 
water, 
No reflections, images, or the like, are apparent, 
This too is a sign of death. 
If, when bathing, water docs not cling to the area around the 
heart, 
Or if the water dries out [quickly 1 around the heart, this may 
indicate death. 
It is [also] said that if no sound is emitted when one snaps the 
fingers, this may indicate death; 
And if the anklebones protrude from the legs, 
It is said that one may die after one month. 
[Furthermore],.it is said that if one leaves no footprints in soft 
earth, this may indicate death, 
And if one becomes weaker after having eaten nutritious food, 
And if one's shadow changes [its shape unnaturally], this too 
may indicate death. 
When lice and nits [suddenly] gather or leave, this may 
indicate death. 
If a former temperament, peaceful or wrathful, is reversed, 
And if a former pattern of behaviour, good or bad, changes, 
These too are signs indicative of a person's death. 
If one's image reflected in water or in a mirror lacks a head or 
limbs, 
This too may be a sign of death. SIG:-iS OF DEATH 
If there is a retraction of the penis and protrusion of the 
testicles, or vice versa, 
If a previously unheard pulmonary wheezing sound occurs, 
And if one cannot sense the smell of a dying butter lamp, 
These are said to be signs that one will certainly die 
[imminently]. 
In addition to such signs, the following may also occur: 
A turbid confusion and darkening of normal consciousness, 
A loss of one's former appetite, 
Embarrassment and incapacity in undertaking virtuous acts, 
A [restless] urge to leave, and an inability to stay in one 
place, 
Discomfort in bed and inability to fall asleep, 
Recurring amnesia and disorientation, 173 
Recurring memories of one's former kindred, and the desire to 
be with them [again], 
Death wishes and the desire to commit suicide, 
The desire to roam and travel alone, without companions, 
Inertia, faintheartedness, and character changes, 
Poor physique and the convergence of many different illnesses, 
Dreams which are disturbed and recurringly negative, 
The welling up of powerful mental anxiety, 
Impious behaviour, which does not avoid the five poisonous, 
dissonant mental states, 
Lack of clarity and loss of faith in the [sublime] instructions, 
And incontinence or constant secretion of generative fluids. 
Such are the [miscellaneous] signs that death is ncar. 
Examine and scrutinise them with awareness! 
Then, [if the time of death has arrived], 
The transference of consciousness should be performed!33 
SIGNS OF EXTREMELY NEAR DEATH 
Now follows the presentation of the signs of extremely ncar 
death: 
The five sense faculties dissolve sequentially, 
And as a sign of this [imminent] demise of the sense faculties, 174 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
One will be unable to digest food and drink, and one may 
vomit. 
Bodily warmth will diminish, the neck will not support the 
head, 
And one will feel that the head is sinking downwards. 
Then the five elements will dissolve as follows:34 
The internal earth element comprises flesh and bone. 
As an indication of its dissolution into the external earth 
element, 
The body will grow heavy, and its skin will sag towards the 
ground, 
Whereupon, as an internal sign, one will feel that the body is 
sinking into the earth. 
Because the energy of earth will have dissolved into water, 
One will be incapable [of supporting] one's physical form. 
Bodily strength will slip away, and consciousness will become 
clouded.35 
The internal water element comprises blood and serum. 
As an indication of its dissolution into the external water 
element, 
Saliva and nasal mucus will be secreted, 
While the throat and the tongue will become dry. 
Because the energy of water will have dissolved into fire, 
The warmth of the body will slip away, 
And consciousness will oscillate between clarity and dullness. 16 
The internal fire element comprises warmth. 
As an indication of irs dissolution into the external fire 
element, 
The eyes will roll upwards, and one will no longer recognise 
people. 
Because the energy of fire will have dissolved into wind, 
The warmth [of the body] will converge. 37 
The internal wind element comprises breath. 
As an indication of its dissolution into the external wind 
element, 
The breath will become wheezy, and the limbs will quiver. SIGNS 01-DI-.ATII 175 
As an internal indication, consciousness will become turbulent, 
While mirage-like flashing and fleeting [visions] will arise, 
And [concurrently] all lice and nits will leave the body.'8 
[Then], the red 'generative essence' derived from one's mother 
will rise upwards, 
And the phenomenon called 'redness' will occur, 
Wherein all appearances are suffused by redness. 
At that point, appearances will dissolve into the '[subtle 
mental consciousness of] increasing [redness]', 
And the forty patterns of conceptual thought that originate 
from attachment will cease. '9 
[Then], the white 'generative essence' derived from one's father 
will fall downward, 
And the phenomenon called 'whiteness' will occur, 
Wherein all appearances are suffused by whiteness. 
At that point, the 'increasing [redness]' will dissolve into the 
'[subtle mind of] attainment', 
And the thirty-three patterns of conceptual thought that 
originate from aversion will cease. 
[During this process, each exhalation of] breath will become 
increasingly protracted, 
While all the blood of the body will converge in the 'life 
channel', 40 
And then a single drop of blood will form at the heart-centre. 
In this way, the phenomenon called 'blackness' will occur, 
Engulfing the suffocating mind in blackness, 
And one will experience the sensation of falling into darkness, 
as if into an abyss. 
At that point, 'attainment' will dissolve into the '[subtle mind 
of] near art;linmenr', 
And the seven patterns of conceptual thought that originate 
from delusion will cease. 
[During this process], the mouth will open, and the eyes will 
roll upwards, 
[Exposing] their pale underside. 
External appearances I will fade], as during the setting of the sun, THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
And [finally J the sense faculties, memory, and perceptions will 
all cease, 
Whereupon, all [external] appearances will be absorbed into 
blackness. 
At that point, the [exhaled! breath will extend [from the bodyJ 
by a cubit, 
And [all] internal appearances will [also] come to resemble 
darkness. 
Then, the blood in the heart will form two drops, 
The head will stoop, 
And the [exhaled] breath will extend [from the body] by an 
arrow-length. 
Following this, the blood in the centre of the heart will form 
three drops, 
And, with HIKA-like gasps, the [exhaled] breath will extend 
[from the body] by a double arm-span.41 
[Then], the external breath will cease, and, engulfed by 
blackness, one will become unconscious. 
Then, the white and red 'generative essences' will meet 
together at the heart, 
And, as this occurs, one will swoon into a state of blissfulness. 
Thus, consciousness dissolves into inner radiance,42 
Engendering the experience of the 'co-emergent delight'. 
[At this point], awareness dissolves into actual reality, at the 
centre of the heart, [like the meeting of] mother and child.43 
[It is at this time that] the inner breath will [also] cease,44 
And the vital energy and mind will rest in the central channel. 
[At this moment], the inner radiance of the ground dawns 
upon all sentient beings, 
And, in the case of a few yogins who have achieved realisation, 
At this moment, the inner radiance of the path meets [the inner 
radiance of the ground],45 
Like a [meeting ofl a mother and child, 
And [thus, now], instantaneously, in an ascending and 
core-penetrating manner, 
These [yoginsJ will actualise the uncreated Buddha-body of 
Reality, SIG:-.~ OF Dl:ATH 
And through the Buddha-bodies of Perfect Resource and 
Emanation, 
They will perform inestimable actions for the sake of all 
beings. 177 
[Thus], the three buddha-bodies will be spontaneously present, 
And buddhahood will have been attained. 
Because of this, one should understand the significance of 
obtaining a human body, 
And cherish the experiential cultivation of the profound 
[sacred] teachings. 
For, even though the genuine inner radiance [of the ground] 
will[always] arise [at the moment of death], 
In the case of all beings who have not [already] realised the 
[inner radiance of the path], 
It will not be recognised. 
The [past] births that one has assumed and left behind are 
countless and infinite, 
And, although the inner radiance has indeed arisen an 
indescribable [number of times], 
It has been obscured [again and again] by the dense [fog of] 
coemergent ignorance, 
And [thereby], one has come to wander endlessly through 
cyclic existence. 
This is why it is important to achieve such a secure level [of 
realisation in this life]. 
[SIGNS INDICATING THE PLACE OF 
SUBSEQUENT REBIRTH] 
At the moment, [as described above], when the outer breath is 
ab.:>ut to cease, 
Signs will also occur [which indicate] the place of subsequent 
rebirth. 
If [when dying] the right hand quivers, one talks nonsensically, 
And bodily warmth recedes from under the right armpit, 
[This indicates that] one will be born as an antigod. TliE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
If nasal mucous and vital wind flow through the left nostril, 
And bodily warmth recedes from the left eye, 
[This indicates that] one will be born as a human being. 
If animal sounds are emitted from the mouth, urine is secreted 
from the urethra, 
And bodily warmth recedes from the genitals, 
[This indicates that] one will be born as an animal. 
If the skin turns yellowish and lustreless, 
And there is salivation, accompanied by sensations of hunger, 
While reproductive fluid is secreted, 
[This indicates that] one will be reborn as an anguished spirit. 
If the right leg shakes, defecation takes place, 
Anger is felt, and bodily warmth recedes from the soles of the 
feet, 
It is said that this person will be born in the hells. 
If one experiences intense pride, bodily warmth recedes from 
the ears, 
And consciousness is emitted via the ears, 
!This indicates thatJ one will be born as a yak~a.4
b 
If good circumstances prevail [at the time of death], 
And if there is minimal impairment of the vital organs, and 
dear mindfulness, 
And if one's spiritual teacher and fellow practitioners gather 
together, with an inspired perspective, 
And if serum and other signs appear at the crown of the 
head, 
And consciousness is transferred from the crown of the head, 
Then, it is said that one will achieve liberation, or take birth 
among the higher realms.47 
Therefore, it is most important [to create] the right 
circumstances at the time of death. 
Furthermore, there are indications and signs of a higher or 
lower rebirth 
That arise after the death of a sentient being. 
These relate to changes occurring in the sky, which should be 
examined over [an appropriate] number of days: 
If the sky turns dark brown, or vaporous [clouds] well up, 
Or if there are winds, chilling breezes, blizzards and so forth, 'iiG:-o;~ Of DEATH 
All these are indications that the [deceased] will be born 
among the hell realms. 
If a lustrelcss mist hangs in the sky, and the sun and moon 
fade, 
If there is no wind or breeze, and the sun is obscured, 179 
Or if there are traces of rain, or else if it rains in the evening, 
All these are indications that the [deceased] will be born 
among the realms of anguished spirits. 
If the sky turns brownish, and there is unbroken black cloud, 
Or if there is a mist and an unpleasantly brown sky, 
All these are indications that the [deceased] will be born 
among the animal realms. 
If the clouds in the sky turn yellowish black and assume 
terrifying forms, 
And hurtle fiercely back and forth, driven by the wind, 
Or if there is thunder and lightning, and the sun and moon 
become invisible, 
All these are indications that the [deceased] will be born 
among the antigod realms. 
If the sky is bright and the sun and moon are clearly visible, 
I Or the atmosphere is I utterly clear, without wind or breeze, 
All these are indications that the [deceased] will be born 
among the god realms. 
If the sky is bright and clear, and fine white silken clouds 
appear, 
Or if the sun and moon are encircled by aureoles of light, 
All these arc the indications that the [deceased] will be born 
among rhe human realms. 
\X'hichever of the above indications arise, 
They signify that the I deceased] will be born in one or other of 
the six !mundane] realms. 
These [signs] will occur either two, three, or seven days after 
death, 
As it is explained in the Tantra of the Cremation of Corpses.48 
The indications that one has attained the three buddha-bodies 
with a pure rebirth, 
Or that one has attained liberation in the manner of the 
sky-farcrs, r8o THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Are explained in the Tantra of the Cremation of Corpses, and 
in the Liberation by \Y./earing.49 
One should therefore consult these sources in detail. 
CONCLUSION 
Since living beings do not know when they will die, 
These signs of death should be looked for again and again. 
When the signs occur, indicating that one is certainly to die, 
Then one should renounce whatever possessions one has, 
And clearly call to mind the spiritual teacher, 
One's fellow practitioners, assembled around one, and the oral 
teachings. 
Especially, one should prepare to apply the transference [of 
consciousness ],50 
And listen to and reflect on the teaching of the Liberation by 
Hearing in the Intermediate States. 51 
[However], when the external, internal, and secret signs of 
death do occur, 
If one does not perform the Ritual Deception of Death, 52 
One will incur the downfall of abandoning the assemblies of 
the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 
Who are the Conquerors, present within one's own body.53 
As a result, one's commitments will degenerate, and one will 
proceed to the hells. 
It is said that this is even more negative than the [five] 
inexpiable crimes. 
Therefore one should diligently persevere in the practices of 
the Ritual Deception of Death. 
[furthermore], if consciousness is transferred [too soon], 
When [only] one or other of the external or internal signs of 
death is present, 
This is called the 'slaying of the deities'. 
One must not allow this to occur, because the downfall wilfbe 
extremely great. 
But if all the signs of death are completely present, and cannot 
be averted, SIGJ\~ Of DEATH 
Then, and only then, should one apply the instructions of 
consciousness transference. 
It is said, in the tantras, with regard to the advantages of the 
timely application of consciousness transference, 
That even one \vho has committed an inexpiable crime 
Will proceed to higher rebirths and blissful states, 
And can attain liberation, [through the timely application of 
the instructions on transference]. 
EMA! I have here presented the Natural Liberation through 
[Recognition of] the Visual Indications and Signs of Death, 
Which is a supporting text to the teaching on the Liberation 
by Hearing in the Intermediate States, 
An extract from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A 
Profound Sacred Teaching, [entitled] Natural Liberation through 
[Recognition on Enlightened Intention. 
0 yogins of posterity, comprehend this as it is! 
SAMA Y A! rgya rgya rgya! 
.May [this teaching] be encountered by fortunate beings, 
Who possess a [ positive] residue of past actions, 
And who are intelligent, faithful, persevering, and 
compassionate. 
J\by [the activities associated with this teaching], 
The Natural Liberation through [Recognition of] the Visual 
Indications and Signs of Death, never be exhausted 
Until cyclic existence has been emptied! 
This is a treasure-teaching revealed by the accomplished master 
Karma Lingpa. ~1ay virtue prevail! 9 
Natural Liberation of Fear 
through the Ritual 
Deception of Death CONTEXT 
This is the companion text to the previous chapter and it describes 
the practices to be followed in the event that definitive signs indicat­
ing death are discerned. 
The general consolidated rite described in this chapter follows 
the classical structure of many Vajrayana protective rituals. This 
consolidated rite, and similar rituals, are commonly performed in 
Tibetan Buddhist communities today by practitioners, both for their 
own benefit and for the benefit of others.* On the other hand, the 
specific rites, related to specific signs, are again idiosyncratic and are 
not commonly practised. 
•for a selection of finely translated Vajrayiina protective rituals, see Stephen Beyer, 
The Cult ofT tJra. Herein is contained the Natural Liberation of fear through the 
Ritual Deception of Death, 1 [an extract] from the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, {entitled} Natural 
Liberation through [Recognition of} I-:nlightened Intention.2 
I bow down to the glorious transcendent one, lYajra]kumara, 
whose face frowns with wrath!3 
The methods by which death can be averted and postponed should 
now be explained in order that living beings might be released 
from suffering, and in order that all the unremitting and extremely 
bitter sufferings of death, [in particular], might be dispelled by 
Mahakaruryika.4 For, the sufferings of all such beings [who are 
afflicted by the discomforts associated with death 1 may be com­
pletely curtailed [through ritual means]. It is the case that, for some 
children of buddha nature, the signs of death will arise, [when 
looked for] as described in the previous chapter. The esoteric 
instructions for averting [the signs which indicate] the swiftly 
approaching year or month [of death] consist of both the general 
consolidated rite and specific rites. 
GENERAL CONSOLIDATED RITE FOR 
AVERTING DEATH 
The general rite for averting death is applicable in cases when the 
lifespan is threatened by obstacle-causing forces and [imbabncedJ 
elemental forces. Now, the body of a person acts as a supporting 
frame for the five elements, and it naturally comprises five append-RITUAL DECEPTION OF DEATH 
ages, five sense-organs, five solid viscera, five hollow viscera, and 
five great energy channels. In each of these [anatomical] parts, the 
five elements circulate in a clockwise manner,5 and the cessation 
of life can occur due to [external] circumstances, or one could die 
through the mingling of conflicting internal elements, or life could 
also cease through the agency of a severe obstacle-causing force. 
The [time of] death may be ascertained by actually observing the 
respective signs associated with these [three causes of death], as 
and when they manifest. 
Immediately following the initial experience of such [signs], one 
should perform the [appropriate] rites for averting [death], which 
include ceremonies, services, and exorcisms. 
In this regard, [one should know that] of the twelve months of 
the year, two are ruled by each of the [five] elements, while the 
two [remaining] months are ruled [by all five elements] in common. 
Also, within each of these months [of the year] there is a five-day 
period ruled by each of the [five] elements, while the five [ re­
maining] days are ruled [by all five elements] in common. [The 
signs of death] cannot be averted, however, when an [im­
balanced] elemental or malevolent force [completely] controls the 
body. Just as, for example, if fire breaks out in a tall fortress, it is 
more easily averted while it is first confined within the lower storey, 
but should it reach the top [of the fortress], the fire cannot be 
extinguished. 
A person in whom the signs [of death] have manifested should 
first make preliminary offerings to the spiritual teacher, and to the 
Three Precious Jewels, and accumulate as much merit as possible. 
Then, the ritual for averting [an imbalance in the elements] should 
be effected through the agency of the wheels and seed-syllables of 
the elements. This should be done as follows: [First], draw a series 
of wheels [representing the elements] on Indian paper or palm leaf. 
The representation of the [green] wheel of the wind element6 should 
depict four spokes and a circumference, with five Y A¥ syllables 
.inscribed, one on each spoke and one at the centre, and with the 
vowels and consonants [depicted] on the outer circumference.7 The 
red wheel of the fire element should be similar [in design], with 
four spokes etc., but inscribed with five RA¥ syllables, placed as 
before, and the vowels and consonants on its circumference, [all 
placed] as before. Similarly, the yellow wheel of the earth element 
should be depicted with five LA¥ syllables, the white wheel of the THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
water element with five KHA¥ syllables, and the azure wheel of 
the space element with five E syllables. [Then], on each of these 
insuibed wheels, one should visualise the deities who embody the 
nature of these elements, corresponding in colour to their respect­
ive wheels.8 
Then one should make five offerings, [one] to [each of] these 
[deities], confess all negativity, and pray for one's desired purpose. 
After this, recite the seed-syllables of the individual [deities] the 
appropriate number of times, corresponding to the age of the 
person in years, and [visualise that] the [seed-syllables] are then 
absorbed into the [respective] deities.9Then [each of the depictions] 
of the [elemental] wheels should be placed inside containers made 
from two small bowls of dough, which are sealed together, and 
bound with threads of five colours, forming [the pattern of] a 
cross. 
In addition, a dough effigy of the subject's human form should 
be prepared, one cubit in height. The dough should be mixed with 
wood, water, fire, earth, and the breath of different species of 
sentient beings.10 [Depictions of] the [same] five seed-syllables 
should then be inserted into the five [corresponding] sense-organs 
[of this effigy]. 11 
As for the substances to be used for the ritual deception of the 
malevolent forces r which cause death], create substitutes, which 
may be made either of red minium clay, or else from dough, which 
is then painted. These should all be equal finger-widths in size, 
black, red, yellow, white, green and multicoloured, 12 correspond­
ing in number to the age of the subject. These should be mixed 
with the subject's grime, clothing, nasal mucous, saliva, tears, hair, 
fingernails, and so forth; as well as with ground jewels or precious 
substances. They should then be adorned with [five] coloured wool 
threads and various silks, and also decorated with many sorts of 
bird feathers, [which are indicative] of bad omens. u Each [substi­
tute] should then have a torma-offering [prepared], corresponding 
to it in colour, and [it should be surrounded by] a number of dough 
chang-bu offerings, equalling the subject's age in years. 
Then, consecrate all these with the six mantras and six gestutes, 
and repeat the following words, 'Take them! Take them! 0 mighty 
[malignant] ones! Your craving! Your attachment! Your clinging! 
Your memories! Your grasping! Your thoughts! Your contact! Let 
go of them! Be pacified! And be free!' RITUAL DECEPTION OF DEATH 
Then, together with the [bowls containing the elemental] wheels, 
cast [these substitutes] into the torrent of a wide river. Death will 
thereby be averted for up to three years. It is best, therefore, if this 
rite is performed once every three years, ev.en before the indications 
[of death] have occurred. 
SPECIFIC RITES FOR AVERTING DEATH 
I bow down to the deity Mahakarm;ika, 
Who is a sanctuary of great bliss. 
The methods employed in the specific rites for averting death are 
now presented. 
[Ritual Averting of Signs of Near Death] 
For all these rites, which follow, it is best if the subject's own 
spiritual teacher can be present, or alternatively a sympathetic 
friend. They should empower the five sense-organs [of the subject] 
with the seed-syllables of the elements.14 
Then, in cases when the fingernails become lustrcless, [as 
described in the previous chapter], a religious feast should be 
offered to seven monks. Donations should be offered, and one 
should receive the [Buddhist! vows, wearing yellow clothes. If one 
has already taken these vows, one should retake them. Thereby, 
[death! will be averted. 
Similarly, in cases when the cornea of the eyes begins to fade, 
small terracotta imprints of white earth should be moulded, their 
number equalling the subject's own age in years. After seven cir­
cumambulations [of the terracotta imprints], cast these into a lake 
or river, and then [retreat!, taking a number of paces equal ro the 
•ubject's age in years, while reciting the Heart-mantra of Dcpen­
Jent Origination 15 and not looking back. 
In cases when the hair of the nape of the neck grows upwards, 
one should prepare a dough with black seeds and [usc this to] 
make a substitute effigy, one cubit in height. Into its heart, one 
should then insert a number of crushed berries, equalling the sub­
ject's age in years, and attach a label bearing the subject's own 
name. The hair should be made from the subject's cut hair. Blood THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
should be drawn from the subject's body, and smeared on its face. 
It should then be wrapped in the subject's clothing and smeared 
with black pigment. Then, at one hundred and twenty-one paces 
from the subject's own dwelling, one should dig a triangular dark 
pit, and recite [RA~t], the seed-syllable of the element fire, a number 
of times equalling the subject's age in years. Then repeat the follow­
ing words three times, 'Black demon! Take this [effigy]! This is 
important! This is important!' Then, throw it into the pit, defecate 
upon it, cover it with earth and run away. Then, one should 
re-examine [the above sign of death]. If it persists as before, the 
rite will not have been effective [and need not be repeated]. How­
ever, there is no doubt that if other [associated signs] have not 
been [completely] averted by a single performance [of the rite], they 
will be successfully averted following three such performances. 
In cases when the indication of [protruding] ankle bones 
appears, one should face westwards towards the sun when it is 
close to setting, and remove one's clothes. Then placing a dog's 
tail under you and some excrement in a heap in front, one should 
eat a mouthful and bark like a dog. This [rite] should be repeated 
three times. 
Also in cases when other people are afflicted by illness: if the 
roots of their teeth grow grimy and black, such a person should 
wear a goat's skin, face the sunrise, and bleat three times like a 
goat. Similarly, in cases when the nostrils sag inwards, it will be 
beneficial if one visualises the syllable A on the tip of the subject's 
nose, 16 recites the syllable A twenty-one times, and bathes in 
vanous nvers. 
In cases when the limbs are subject to repeated spasms, it will 
be beneficial if one draws a four-spoked wheel on each of the limbs 
with a solution of shellac, and bathes a number of times, equalling 
the subject's age in years, in [consecrated] water over which many 
dharm.zf mantras have been recited. 
In cases when the eyes stare fixedly, one should prepare a bounti­
ful religious feast on behalf of the monastic community; and hold 
a party for a number of children, equalling the subject's age in 
years. One should also wear red clothing. 
In cases when the right cheek sags inwards, [for the rites of the 
earth element], one should mould a number of small terracotta 
imprints, equalling the subject's age in years. For the rites of the 
water element one should make a number of water libations, equal-RITUAL DECEPTION OF DEATH 
ling the subject's age in years; for the rites of the fire element one 
should make a number of burnt offerings, equalling the subject's 
age in years; for the rites of the wind clement, one should erect a 
number of flags, equalling the subject's age in years; and for the 
rites of the space clement, one should recite a number of syllables 
E, equalling the subject's age in years. Thereby, there is no doubt 
that [deathl will be ritually deceived. 
In cases when the breathing becomes agitated, it will be beneficial 
and [death] will be averted if one makes a concentrated paste of 
molasses over which [YA~t], the seed-syllable of the wind clement, 
has been recited. 
In cases when the nose tilts to the right or left, one should 
visualise a white syllable H 0 ~~ on the tip of the nose. In cases when 
tears flow uncontrollably, one should visualise the syllable BHRO~t 
on the subject's eyes.17 In cases when the left cheek sags inwards, 
one should visualise the syllable K~A [on the cheek].18 In cases 
when the teeth become locked, one should visualise the syllable 
HO¥ [on the teeth]. If a black spot appears on the tongue, one 
should visualise the short syllable HO~t [on the tongue].19 If the 
ears lie flat [against the head], one should visualise the syllable 
MA¥ [on the ears).20 If the xiphoid of the chest is sagging inwards, 
one should visualise the syllable MO¥ [on the xiphoidj.11 In cases 
when the pulse of the carotid arteries11 is missing, one should 
visualise the syllable H 0 ~~ [on those arteries]. These visualised 
syllables should be recited as many times as equals the subject's 
age in years; and they should also be drawn [on the appropriate 
point of the body J, using vermilion and scented water. 
[Ritual Averting of the Signs of Remote Death] 
Similarly, when an examination is made of one's reflected image 
optically projected onto the sky: if the symbolic hand-held imple­
.nent is missing, one should perform one hundred and eight feast­
offerings on behalf of one's spiritual teacher. If the right hand is 
missing, one should prepare a dough effigy, one cubit in height, 
using seven kinds of grain. The head should be fashioned to 
resemble an open-jawed lion, and a number of gull feathers should 
be inserted into it, equalling the subject's age in years. The effigy 
should then be carried down a main street tmvards a royal manor, 
which is located to the north. THE TIBETAN BOOK 01' TilE OEAD 
In cases when the left hand is missing, one should place the fang 
of a black-striped tiger and the fang of a black dog inside a weasel 
skin. On top of that one should place a dough effigy, kneaded 
together with the subject's own urine, and then ritually expel the 
effigy by throwing it into a river. 
In cases when the right leg is missing below the knee, f death l 
will be averted if, at dusk as the sun is setting, one offers a number 
of acacia or juniper lamps, equalling the subject's age in years. 
In cases when the left leg is missing, one should make an effigy 
of white earth, one cubit in height, and insert into its heart a 
birchwood stick, four finger-widths in length, marked with 
notches, equalling the subject's own age in number. It should be 
carried off at daybreak, and left in an empty quadrangle. 
In cases when the right part of the head is missing, one should 
compound various kinds of inauspicious earth with the fruits of 
black wood trees, and [out of this mixture] make a black amulet, 
into which the subject's own hair and clothing fragments should 
be inserted, along with a label made from mountain willow wood, 
[inscribed] with the names of the twelve [animal] year-signs. Then 
the amulet should be sealed, and a number of thorns of different 
species should be attached to its upper face. If one can find as 
many differing types of thorn as equals the subject's age in years 
it would be best. Otherwise, if one cannot find [that many], one 
should insert as many [differing types] as one can find. Then at 
midnight, one should put on black clothing and carry the amulet 
to a cemetery. 
In cases when the left part of the head is missing, one should 
make a dough effigy using twenty-five different types of grain, and 
insert [fragments of] human bones, horse bones and dog bones 
into its heart. Then, one should wrap the effigy in the subject's old 
clothing, and at twilight on the eleventh day [of the lunar month], 
one should give it to another person for insertion into a pit r which 
has been made] eighty paces to the south. At that time, one should 
cry out, proclaiming one's sorrows three times, and bury the effigy. 
Thereupon, [death] will be averted. 
In cases when the head is missing above the neck, one should 
make a number of burnt offerings using thorn bushes, equalling 
the subject's age in years, and burn them in succession. While each 
of these is burning, the heart-mantra syllable of fire [ RA ¥] RITUAL DECEPTION OF DEATH 193 
should be recited, for a number of times equalling the subject's age 
m years. 
In cases when the head and the neck are missing, one should 
blacken one's body with burnt charcoal, and bind one's hair up 
on the crown of the head. Then, on a piece of paper, four finger­
widths in size, one should write the subject's age and the name of 
the present year, and around this in the four cardinal directions, 
one should inscribe the seed-syllables of the four elements. This 
[paper simulacrum] should then be attached to the nose, and at 
noon on the ninth day Jof the lunar monthj, one should run in 
each of the four directions, shouting out uninterruptedly, 'You 
take this! You take this!' Then the paper should be buried in a 
charnel ground. 
In cases when the upper trunk is missing, one should light a 
wood fire, and burn a label inscribed with the names of the twelve 
[animal! year-signs. In cases when the lower trunk is missing, it 
will suffice if one goes to a charnel ground, and uses the assorted 
bones one finds to make smoke. 
In cases when the right side of the body is missing, [one should 
recite the dhlirm;i mantra ofj U~QI~a[ -vijaya], as many times as 
equals the subject's age in years, and one should [mould] a number 
of small terracotta imprints, equalling the subject's age in years. 
In cases when the left side [of the body] is missing, one should read 
aloud countless dharu1.zi mantras, and wear red clothing. 
[Ritual Averting of Further Signs of Near Death] 
In C3ses when the 'severing of the bond between atmosphere and 
earth' occurs, one should read aloud the extensive scriptures,23 or 
complete a number of virtuous acts. 
In cases when the 'fall of a rider on a white lioness' occurs, it 
will be beneficial if one performs as many maQ9ala rituals as equals 
the subject's age in years. 
If the 'rupturing of the [Wish-granting] Tree' occurs, one should 
know the cures for each of the [ailments affecting! the solid and 
hollow viscera.24 
In cases when urine scum appears reddish blue/5 one should 
fashion a dough effigy of the twelve [animal] year-signs, with their 
elcments/6 and for each subsequent change in the colour [of the 194 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
urine scum], one should make a single terracotta imprint, a single 
water libation, a single 'substitute effigy' of the subject, and a single 
burnt offering of birchwood. Then, at sunrise, one should carry 
these off to a cemetery in the north-east. 
In cases when [the urine vapour] is blackish and putrid, one's 
purpose will be achieved if one mixes powdered iron and copper 
with various grains, and scatters this [mixture] in the four 
directions. 
In cases when the vapour is red and spotted, one should make a 
number of substitutes, imbued with the subject's own body odour, 
equalling the subject's age in years, and attach a red silk flag and 
a porcupine quill to each. [Death] wilL be averted if one carries 
these off, together with assorted bones, to a main road in the 
east. 
In cases when one's excrement has no vapour, one should face 
the west at a time when the sun is at its peak, and inscribe the 
elemental seed-syllables on the skull of a horse. !Death] will then 
be averted if one neighs as many times as possible. 
In cases when the humming sound [normally heard] when the 
ears fare cupped] is absent/7 one should prepare a number of 
torma-offerings of various foods, equalling one's age in years, and 
attach a label to each of these, bearing the names of the twelve 
[animal year-signs]. One's purpose will be achieved if one then 
conveys these [torma-offerings] to the foot of a palm tree.28 
In cases when the [sign known as] 'lone-legged Yavati) arising 
[as an enemy] against the leaves of the Wish-granting Tree' occurs, 
one will be liberated [from the indications of death], if one per­
severes in the accumulation [of merit] and engages in virtuous 
activities. 
[CONCLUSION] 
After the rituals have been performed according to the above 
instructions, one should look again [for the visual indications of 
death]. If the nature of their appearance has altered, the indicati6ns 
will undoubtedly be averted if the rites are repeated from seven to 
twenty-one times, or a number of times equalling the subject's age 
m years. 
This completes the esoteric instruction concerning the ritual RITUAL DECEPTION OF DEATH 195 
aversion of death, which was composed by the master Pad­
masambhava, as a means of liberating sentient beings from 
their sufferings. May it be encountered by one of worthy past 
actions! 
SAMAYA! rgya rgya rgya! 
This is a treasure-teaching revealed by the treasure-finder Karma 
Lingpa. 10 
Consciousness Transference: 
Natural Liberation 
through Recollection CONTEXT 
Practitioners of this cycle of teachings who commence with the 
Preliminary Practice (Chapter 1), and purify all their negativity and 
obscurations, generated by their past actions, through the practice 
of the Natural Liberation of Habitual Tendencies, the Hundredfold 
Homage and the Confession (Chapters 5-7), and who also experienti­
ally cultivate the practices described in the Introduction to Awareness 
(Chapter 4), will, in the best of cases, attain liberation from cyclic 
existence in this very lifetime. 
However, those who are unable to realise this level of achievement 
should implement the instructions on consciousness transference 
described in this chapter at the time of their own death. 
This wonderful practice is classed among the few that do not 
require previous experience of Vajrayana meditational practices in 
order to be effective. Once guidance has been received from a quali­
fied spiritual teacher, the practitioner should follow the course of 
training, outlined in this chapter, until the signs of accomplishment 
arise. Then, the practitioner should maintain this proficiency through­
out his or her life. 
It is regarded as extremely beneficial if those that are accomplished 
in this practice perform this consciousness transference in support 
of other people or animals when they are dying. This should be begun 
during the interval between the cessation of the outer respiration 
and the cessation of the inner respiration, at the point when the 
_mind and body separate, and can be continued for an appropriate 
period after death. 
As the text stresses, at the time of the practitioner's own death, it 
is critically important that this technique is only actually implemented 
at the exact moment of death. Herein is contained an oral instruction entitled Consciousness 
Transference: Natural Liber,ltion {through Recollection], 1 which 
relates to the intermediate state of the time of death. This is the 
fourth topic in the Guide to the Six Intermediate States according 
to the Perfection Stage,2 which is an extract from the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, {entitled} Natural 
Liberation through f Recognition of] Enlightened Intention. 3 
INTRODUCTION 
This Consciousness Transference: Natural Liberation through 
Recollection, which is the fourth topic [in the Guide to the Six 
Intermediate States according to the Perfection Stage, and which 
specifically contains] guidance on the intermediate state of the time 
of death, will [now] be presented. 4 
This Consciousness Transference: Natural Liberation through 
Recollection is a powerful method, a means for attaining buddha­
hood which does not [necessarily] require meditation. This oral 
instruction through which buddhahood can be attained at the time 
of death is [therefore! most valuable for those who have not trained 
in the cycle of Cutting through Resistance, or [in the meditations 
of] the Illusory Body, Dream Yoga, and Inner Radiance, and have 
[therefore] not realised the truth of the four modes of liberation. 
In particular, [iris valuable] for ordinary persons, officials, house­
holders and distracted individuals who have had no time to m~di­
tate, despite having received those [instructions!. That is, [it is 
valuable to alii those who have not engaged in experiential culti­
vation, even though they may have obtained profound teachings, 
and who, [as a consequence], may die in an ordinary frame of 201 
mind, having left the instructions as (unrealised] words, or having 
left [their relationship to] the [sacred] teachings as a [mere] theor­
etical understanding. 
Now, anyone who is born is subsequently certain to die. Yet the 
time of death is unknown. Indeed, since one's death might be 
imminent, one should be constantly alert to [the signs which por­
tend] death. In accordance with the Natural Liberation through 
/Recognition of/ the Visual Indications and Signs of Death,5 one 
should analyse the signs indicative of remote death, the signs 
indicative of near death, the signs indicative of uncertain death, 
and the signs indicative of inevitable death. One should also per­
severe with [the practices contained in] the Ritual Deception of 
Death, as these correspond to the signs of death which might 
appear.~> If, on the other hand, one were to perform this conscious­
ness transference, either when the signs of death are not fully 
present or even when the signs are fully present but without having 
[first] practised the ritual deception of death, then one would, in 
effect, incur the crime of slaying a deity, and the crime of commit­
ting suicide. This is an even greater misdeed than committing [one 
of the five] inexpiable crimes. Thus, it is essential that one should 
perform the general and specific ritual deceptions of death, which­
ever is appropriate, three times or as often as is required, in accord­
ance with the Natural Liberation of Fear through the Ritual 
Deception of Death.7 If, despite having performed the [appropri­
ate] ritual deception of death on three occasions, the indications 
of death are unaltered, this demonstrates that death is certain to 
occur. It is at this time [only] therefore that one should begin to 
engage in the [actual practice of] consciousness transference. 
Since it is said that [this practice may confer] higher rebirth or 
liberation even on one who has committed the five inexpiable 
crimes, the timely application of consciousness transference can be 
of extremely great benefit. 
TRAINING IN CONSCIOUSNESS 
TRANSFERENCE 
[The practice of] consciousness transference has two aspects: 
[namely] training and the actual application. 2.02. TilE TIBETA:-.1 BOO!\ OF THE DEAD 
First, with regard to training: just as, for example, when a man 
faces the inevitability of the arrival of an external foe, before his 
enemy approaches, he will prepare armour, weapons, and arrows, 
and train in the arts [of warfare], but only don [and apply] these 
when the enemy [actually] arrives and strikes, so, in this context, 
the training takes place before the indications of death have arisen. 
Since one does not know when one will die, training should be 
undertaken from the present moment, for it is essential that [one 
is able] to complete the actual application [of consciousness trans­
ference] successfully, when death becomes certain. 
Now, the training in consciousness transference may be under­
taken [in two contexts]: at times when [general] guidance [on 
preliminary practices] is being given, or when specific guidance on 
consciousness transference is being given, whichever is appro­
priate. H 
As found in the preliminary practices of the [general] guidance,'} 
one should reflect upon the difficulty of obtaining [a human form 
endowed with] freedoms and opportunities [conducive to prac­
tice], and [one should reflect on] the sufferings of cyclic existence, 
and develop an attitude which is disillusioned with cyclic existence 
and desirous of renunciation. Furthermore, even though one has 
obtained [the above freedoms and opportunities j, which are diffi­
cult to obtain, one should [always], from the depths of one's heart, 
remember death, which is never far away. 
Then, sitting on a comfortable seat in the posture of the bodhis­
attvas, one should, in the following manner, close the orifices [of 
the body which lead to rebirth] within cyclic existence: 
The body should be upright and erect. The hands should cover 
the knees, forming the earth-touching gesture, 10 and the shoulders 
should be drawn upwards. Then, in one's own heart one should 
visualise an azure blue syllable H 0 l'yt, blazing with light, from 
which a single syllable H 0 ~~ breaks away and descends to the 
rectum, precisely blocking the orifice through which the hells are 
entered. Another syllable H 0 .~1 breaks away and descends to the 
orifice of procreation, thereby blocking the entrance to [the realm 
of] the anguished spirits. Similarly, another syllable H 0¥ [br~aks 
away and] blocks the entrance I to the world of] animals, which is 
in the urethra, while yet another syllable HO 1'y1 moves to the navel, 
and others to the mouth, the nostrils, the eyes, and the ears, each 
one precisely blocking its respective orifice. 11 CO="~CIUCS:-.;EsS TRA="SFE:.RE:.="CE 203 
Then, on the crown of the head, one should visualise that the 
crown fontanelle is blocked by a downward-facing white syllable 
HA~L12 [Further, one should visualise] the central channel, in the 
middle of the body, straight and erect, with a yellowish white 
lustre, like a taut air-filled sheep's intestine, with its lower extremity 
extending below the navel, and its upper extremity extending to 
the crown fontanelle. At the lower extremity below the navel, at a 
focal point where the three [main] channels converge,13 one should 
visualise a brilliant white seminal point, which is the essence of 
awareness, radiant and clear, breathing rhythmically, continuously 
pulsating, and on the verge of ascending. 
In the space above the crown of the head, one should visualise 
one's spiritual teacher, seated, full of joy, in the form of Vajra­
dhara. Then, one's bodily weight should be [drawn in and] concen­
trated upwards, and the rectum forcefully closed. The eyes should 
be turned upwards, the tongue [lifted to l rest along the upper 
palate, and the hands firmly placed in the 'fist' gesture, 14 with the 
thumbs pressing down on the bases of the fourth fingers. 
[Then], from below the navel, the seminal point is moved force­
fully upwards, and, through the engagement of speech, it is elevated 
with the support of guttural gasps pronounced as 'HI-KA HI-KA'. 
Through the force of the vital energy below, the seminal point is 
unable to resist being accelerated upwards through the central 
channel. By this method, it is moved upwards, with seven HI-KA 
gasps, to the navel. Then, \Vith a further seven HI-KA gasps it 
reaches the heart, with a further seven it reaches the throat, and 
with a further seven it reaches the space between the eyebrows. 
Then, uttering H 1-KA, [a final time], the seminal point makes con­
tact with the syllable HA¥ at the crown fontanelle, after which 
one should visualise that it spins downwards again and comes to 
rest below the navel as a white diffusion. Rest in that state for 
some time. 
By simply repeating this exercise a few times, signs will emerge 
that this [training in] consciousness transference has taken effect: 
a sensation of warmth will well up at the crown fontanelle, and 
there will he sensations of prickliness, irritation, numbness, and 
swelling, while the crown of the head will seem to become supple 
and numb, and serous fluid, blood, and so forth will emerge at the 
crown fontanelle. \'\'hen this occurs, the spiritual teacher should 
carefully examine the crown fontanelle: a peacock feather or stalk 204 THE TIBETAN BOOK Or THE DEAD 
of grass should be inserted [into the fontanelle I so that it settles 
into [the fontanelle]. This [insertion] confirms that the training in 
consciousness transference has been successfully achieved. 
If you do not stop at this point, your practice can limit your 
lifespan. Therefore, one should cease the visualisation and yogic 
exercises, and the crown of the head should be massaged with 
butter or grain-seed oil. If, on the other hand, the signs do not 
appear, ]the seminal point] should be moved upwards many times 
by vigorous effort until the signs eventually do emerge. 
Furthermore, swelling may occur on the crown of the head, and 
if [the seminal point] remains localised at the crown fontanelle 
[and the fontanelle is not breached!, headaches and similar 
[uncomfortable sensations] will occur. Therefore, one should visu­
alise that the syllable HA~1 at the crown fontanelle is opened up, 
and that the seminal point emerges vertically from the crown 
fontanelle, touches the feet of the spiritual teacher [visualised 
above], and then descends again through the fontanelle to rest 
motionless below the navel. By repeating this exercise, just a few 
times, the crown fontanelle will be opened, blood or serous fluid 
will certainly emerge, and the blade of grass can then be inserted. 
After this, it is very important that the crown fontanelle be 
re-blocked by the syllable HA¥, for not doing so could limit your 
lifespan. 
Subsequently fin training], when manoeuvring the seminal point 
up and down within the central channel without the HI-KA breath­
ing and yogic exercises, it remains very important to keep the 
crown fontanelle blocked with the syllable HA~t. 
The [training in I consciousness transference should be practised 
in the above manner. 
However, because HI-KA is a mantra which reduces the life­
span, this should only be used until [training in] consciousness 
transference is successful. Otherwise, after [the training] has been 
successful, do not resort to the HI-KA breathing. If, on account of 
excessive exertion, one overdoes [the training inj consciousness 
transference, one will run the risk of lapsing into perpetual uncon­
sciousness. In such cases, and if the consciousness has risen -roo 
precipitously, and one experiences vertigo and so forth, one should 
beat the soles of the feet with the fists and massage the crown of 
the head. Then, while focusing intensely on the visualisation of an 
extremely heavy golden stOpa on the soles of the feet, one should CO!'<'>CIOL"'>~l:'\S THA="'>FF.HE:-<CE 205 
perform many yogic jumps, so that [the consciousness] is becalmed. 
These essential points are to be generally observed in the course of 
the practical training. 
The 'consciousness transference of the training phase' which has 
just been described should be carefully practised while one is in 
good health, and before the signs of death emerge. SAMA YA! 
THE ACTUAL APPLICATION Of 
CONSCIOUSNESS TRANSFERENCE AT 
THE TIME OF DEATH 
[The Timing and Context] 
Secondly, the application phase refers to the actual transference of 
consciousness, which is to be undertaken when the indications of 
death are unequivocally present and when, even after performing 
the !appropriate] ritual deception of death [practice] on three 
occasions, it is indicated that one will not recover. There are four 
[modes of actual consciousness transference], namely: conscious­
ness transference into the Buddha-body of Reality; consciousness 
transference into the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource; conscious­
ness transference into the Buddha-body of Emanation; and the 
consciousness transference of ordinary persons. 
Concerning these, it is said [in the Root Verses of the Six 11lter­
medi,ztc StatcsJ:1' 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of the time of death arises 
before me, 
Renouncing [all] attachment, yearning and subjective 
apprehension in every respect, 
I must undistractedly enter the path, on which the oral 
teachings are clearly understood, 
And eject my own awareness into the uncreated expanse of space. 
Now, when the signs of the onset of the intermediate state of the 
time of death are provoked by fatal illnesses, at this time, when 
the indications of death are completely present, there are oral 
instructions which bring clearly to mind that which may be 206 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
obscured during the intermediate state of the time of death. [The 
clarity of these instructions] is likened to [the clarity of] an elegant 
lady looking into a mirror. These [instructions] arc twofold: a 
clarification which is elucidated by another16 and a clarification 
undertaken by oneself. 
In the former context: regardless of whether or not one perceives 
the unequivocal presence of the signs of [one's own impending] 
death, these signs will be recognised by the physician and by the 
nurses, based on [their knowledge of] the behavioural changes 
which occur.17 Nonetheless, if one's own mindfulness remains 
clear, one should also examine the indications of near death of 
one's own accord. In any case, when [it is thus ascertained that] 
one is dying, an invitation should be sent to one's root spiritual 
teacher if he or she lives nearby, and all one's possessions should 
be offered to the teacher, without even a single instant of attach­
ment. If one remains even slightly attached [to worldly goods], one 
may be cast into inferior existences, as recounted in the story of 
the monk Barwasum.18 
If an individual is unable to make such offerings in actuality, 
these should be offered mentally, and thereby a complete state of 
renunciation should be achieved. In particular, one should not 
leave any object at all close to [the dying person] which could 
give rise to attachment or aversion. This is the sense of the verse 
'Renouncing [all] attachment, yearning and subjective apprehen­
sion in every respect.' At this time, renunciation should be gener­
ated stainlessly. As it is said in the T,mtra of the Coalescence of 
Sun and Moon: 19 
In particular, one should please with offerings and feasts 
One's own spiritual teacher, the monastic community, 
And the field of accumulated merits.20 
Once the spiritual teacher has arrived, one should confess any 
former violations or breaches of the commitments, if any; and 
make amends for any transgressions or downfalls previously com­
mitted. If one holds any vows, these should be reaffirmed, aiJd if 
no vows J.re held, these should be taken on the basis of the Rite of 
Going for Refuge.21 Then, if one has had previous experience in 
[the practice of] consciousness transference, one should assume 
the appropriate bodily posture, and the visualisation should be C 0 :-.; '> C I 0 L! '> :-.; L '> '> I R :\ ~ '> r L K I· :-.; C 1: 207 
repeatedly elucidated by one's spiritual teacher, in accordaiKe with 
the [specihc tradition] of consciousness transference one formerly 
practised.-~2 Thereupon, it should take effect. As an indication of 
success, as soon as one has expired, the signs that this transference 
has been effective, such as blood or serous f1uid [appearing] at a 
swelling on the crown of the head, will certainly emerge. 
If these signs do emerge, there will be no need to elucidate the 
intermediate states. Bur if they do not appear, the spiritual teacher 
should place his or her lips dose to the car, or else place a bamboo 
reed or a hollow tube of p<lper close to the car, and through it 
slowly elucid,lte the verses [describing! the intnmcdiatc states in 
succession, starting with the intermediate state of reality or inner 
radiance, in accordance with the Libcrdtiun hy Hc.zring.21 If this 
is done appropriately, it is certain that [these instructions! will be 
effective. [The re;lson for their effectiveness can be illustr<Hed as 
follows): If, for example, a powerful king were to dispatch ames­
sage through a reliable person, it would be impossible for that 
person to forget [the mcss;lgcJ. He would communicate it abso­
lutely, fearing that royal repr<><lch would ensue if he were to forget. 
Similarly, in this context, too, fearing the abyss of the lower exist­
ences, one will certainly retain the instructions in mind, and thereby 
achin-c ceruinry as to [the nature) of the intcrmcdi,Hc st.Hc of 
realitv. 
If one's spiritual teacher is nor present, the rlucidarion should 
be nude by a spiritual friend holding the same teaching lineage [as 
oneself[, or else by a fellow spiritual sibling whose commitments 
have not been dissipated, and whose view and conduct arc sym­
pathetic. 
It is said in the T.mtr.z o/ the Cualcsancc o/ Sun .. md .\loon: 
At th<H time, the oral instrucrions of the spiritu<1l teacher 
Should sJtur~ltc one's 111L'nt,d continuum. 
These truths should be repeatedly elucidated. 
The elucidation should he made repcatcdly by a spiritual 
teacher, spiritual friend, or by a fellow spiritual sibling. 
Such is thc form of the darihcation which should be made by 
others [who are caring for a dying person]. 
Secondly, the clarification to be undertaken by oneself [at the 
time of one's own death) is applicable in cases where the spiritual 20H THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THl: DEAD 
teacher and fellow students have not gathered together, or \vhere 
one dies alone in a hermitage, or when one already has a refined 
experience [of consciousness transference] and docs not require an 
elucidation to be made by others. In such cases, one should bring 
dearly to mind the practices which one formerly experientially 
cultivated. 
Consciousness Transference into the 
Buddha-body of Reality 
Now, if one is a person who has some understanding of inner 
radiance, who has cultivated the view of emptiness, and encoun­
tered it directly in [one's own] awareness, the consciousness trans­
ference into the Buddha-body of Reality is the supreme [method]. 
Thus, when this is undertaken, one should first ensure, as abo\·e, 
that one is completely without a single possession which could 
generate attachment or aversion. If one is capable, one should 
secure one's body in the seven postures [of Vairocana], or sit 
upright. If this is not possible, one should lie on one's right side, 
with the head pointing north, and repeatedly think: 'Now that I 
am about to die, how fortunate am I to be able to effect the 
transference of consciousness based on a profound instruction 
such as this, \vhile in the three realms of cyclic existence in general 
and in particular in this degenerate age. So today, I shall now 
recognise the inner radiance of death to be the Buddha-body of 
Reality, and consequently take birth as an inestimable number of 
emanations, in order to guide each in accord with his or her needs. 
I must act on behalf of sentient beings until cyclic existence has 
been emptied!' In this way, generate the altruistic intention [to 
attain enlightenment for the benefit of others] fervently and repeat­
edly. Then, one should think undistractedly, as follows: 'I must 
attend to [the words of] my spiritual teacher, and must [actj in 
accordance with the content of the profound teachings which I 
[formerly] received.' The whole point is that one should not be 
distracted from a state in which the oral instructions are clearly 
held in mind. 
Then, without concocting thoughts, one should free oneself from 
the [dualistic] framework of the object, which is to be trans­
migrated, and the [subjective] an of consciousness transference. 
Intrinsic awareness should he uncontrived and clear, undistractcd CONSCIOCS~ESS TRAl"St-EREI"CE 209 
and distinct, stark in its [coalescence otl radiance and emptiness. 
Let [this experience] remain unmoving for a prolonged period. If 
one expires in this state, the mother and child inner radiances, that 
is to say the inner radiance of the ground and the inner radiance 
of the path which is the focus of one's current meditation, will 
encounter each other, like a stream meeting the main river. [Thus], 
one will attain the uncreated Buddha-body of Reality, in an 
upward-moving core-penetrating manner; and liberation will be 
instantaneous. This is called the 'pure consciousness transference 
into the Buddha-body of Reality' because those who have highly 
developed experience and realisation need repeat only this, again 
and again. It is the best of all modes of consciousness transfer­
ence. 
Now, in the case of those who have not recognised [intrinsic 
awareness I and \vho are without experience and realisation, 
though they may well try to apply this consciousness transference 
into the Buddha-body of Reality, [this would be ineffectual]. It 
would be [like trying] to show a material object to someone who 
has been blind from birth, or [like trying] to point out a [particular! 
star to a dog. It is very important, therefore, that the [method 
of] consciousness transference and the manner of its clarification 
correspond to the mental capacity of the individual. 
If, however, the consciousness transference into the Buddha­
body of Reality is effected in the above manner, as an 'outer sign', 
the sky will become clear and unclouded; and as an 'inner sign', 
the body will glow radiantly and its lustre will not fade for a long 
time. The 'secret signs' include the appearance of the white syllable 
A¥ and the azure syll<1ble H 0¥ [among the cremated relics ].24 
Such is [the instruction onj the consciousness transference into 
the Buddha-body of Reality. SA~1A YA! 
Consciousness Transference into the Buddha­
body of Perfect Resource 
If one chiefly practises the generation stage [of meditation I and 
particubrly if one has little certainty with regard to [the experience 
of! emptiness, one should undertake the consciousness transference 
into the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. If one is capable of 
securing one's body in an upright position, adopting as suggested 
before the appropriate bodily posture, then one should sit upright l.IO TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
and bring clearly to mind the visualisations of consciousness trans­
ference, as previously practised during one's training. In particular, 
one should clearly visualise above the crown of one's head, upon 
a lotus, sun and moon cushion, one's spiritual teacher [in the form 
ofl the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. [The teacher may be 
visualised as] the great Vajradhara, or Vajrasattva, Avalokitesvara, 
and so forth, and especially as one's own particular meditational 
deity, following whichever [practices of] the generation stage one 
prefers. One should meditate clearly on the essence of intrinsic 
awareness as a white seminal point, [situated] below the navel at 
the lower extremity of the central channel within the body; or 
alternatively, [one should clearly visualise here] the seed-syllable 
of one's very own meditational deity: a white syllable Ai;I, an azure 
syllable H0~1, a red syllable HRII;I, and so forth, as appropriate.15 
It will be best if one [also] clearly visualises that [each of] the 
orifices [of one's body] is blocked by the syllable HO¥; but if this 
is not visualised, one should focus one's consciousness single­
pointedly within the central channel, without mentally engaging 
the orifices. 
Then, one's bodily weight should be [drawn in and] concentrated 
upwards, and the rectum forcefully closed. The eyes should be 
turned up\vards, and the tongue llifred to] rest along the [upper] 
palate. The lower vital energy should be moved upwards, while 
focusing one's consciousness within the central channel. Then, in 
conjunction with a series of HI-KA HI-KA gasps, [the seminal point] 
should be moved successively upwards until it reaches the crown 
fontanelle. There, it breaks open the orifice of the crown fontanelle, 
which had been blocked by the syllable HA¥, and shoots upwards, 
like an arrow, blazing with white light, and then it dissolves into 
the heart of the meditational deity [seated above]. One's awareness 
should then be focused upwards into the heart of the meditational 
deity, and without letting it descend, it should be repeatedly drawn 
in, and o.1hsorbed [into the deity's heart]. Then, finally, [the visualis­
ation of] the meditational deity should also be dissolved into a 
non-referential state. If one's breath ceases while [resting) in that 
state, one will attain the status of an awareness holder, inseparable 
from the meditational deity; and achieve buddhahood in the 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. 
If the consciousness transference into the Buddha-body of Per­
fect Resource docs take effect in the above manner, as an 'outer CO;\SCJOt;St-.;E'>S T!{A;\'>I'ERE:-.oCE 21 I 
sign', the sky will be filled with rainbows and light; and as an 
'inner sign', blood or serous fluid will emerge from the crown 
fontandle at the top of the head, or dew-like drops, swellings, and 
so forth will also appear. The 'secret signs' include the appearance 
of any one of the five types of bone relic, and the appearance of 
fbone rdics] shaped like the physical form or hand-implement of 
a deity, and so forth.26 
Such is the consciousness transference into the Buddha-body of 
Perfect Resource. SA.MA YA! 
Consciousness Transference into the 
Buddha-body of Emanation 
As for the appropri<lte bodily posture, one should lay the body 
down on its right side, since [this position] will facilitate the depar­
ture of the vital energy from the left nostril. Then, one should 
request that a statue, relief, or drawing of the Buddha-body of 
Emanation be placed in front of oneself. This could be a represen­
t<ltion of the Great Sage [Sakyamuni Buddha], the King of ~1edicine 
[Yai9uryapr<1bharaj<l], ~laitreya, or Padmasambhava of O<)<)i­
yana; or it could be an image of one's own spiritual teacher or 
spiritual friend. Offerings should be extensively arrayed before the 
[image]. If no image is actually present, clearly visualise one, and 
make mentally imagined offerings. 
Then, all those present, oneself and others, should make the 
following aspirational prayer, saying, 'Now, may I, consequent on 
my death, for the sake of all sentient beings, take birth in an 
emanational body; and may this be of extensive benefit to all liv­
ing beings! Nlay this emanational body also be endowed with the 
major and minor mo1rks, and may there be no obstacles to its 
lifespan and enlightened <.lctivity! ~lay I be reborn as a great 
awareness holder, holding the lineage of the buddhas of the three 
times!' 
~lent<1lly, too, one should retain this fervent aspiration [con­
stantly[, and visualise that within the utterly translucent central 
channel, the essence of one's awareness is located in a triangle 
below the navel, in the form of a white seminal point, tinged with 
red, which is glistening and concentrated, and on the verge of 
rising up\vards. Immedi<.ltely, the rectum should be closed and 
drawn in, so th<lt there is no option but for the seminal point to 212 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
be forced upwards by the power of the vital energy below. Then, 
by means of HI-KA HI-KA gasps, which should be performed to 
the best of one's ability, [the seminal point] should be moved 
upwards, and, as it reaches the orifice of the left nostril, the [motion 
of one's] awareness should be synchronised with [that of one's] 
respiration. Then, in an instant, like an arrow being fired, [one's 
awareness] should penetrate the heart of the Buddha-body of 
Emanation which is before one. Let the vital energy and awareness 
remain there, without reabsorbing them [into one's body]. This 
exercise should be repeated until one's consciousness docs depart 
[the body]. Consequently, [the transference] is certain to take 
effect. Once consciousness does depart in that state, it is certain 
that one will subsequently take birth in an emanational body which 
will act for the benefit of sentient beings. 
If the consciousness transference into the Buddha-body of Ema­
nation does occur in the above way, as an 'outer sign', clouds or 
rainbows will appear in the sky, some resembling a wish-granting 
tree or unfurled white silk, or a shower of flowers, and so forth. 
As an 'inner sign', blood, serous fluid, or generative tluid will 
emerge from the left nostril; or else dew-like drops, and so forth 
may appear. The 'secret signs' include the appearance of many 
small relics, a complete unbroken skull, and [bones in the shape 
of] the hand-emblems of deitics.-~7 
Such is the consciousness transference into the Buddha-body of 
Emanation. SAMAYA! 
Instantaneous Consciousness Transference 
All the [above methods of consciousness transference are appropri­
ate 1 in the context of a person whose death is gradual; but in the 
case of those who die suddenly, there will not be sufficient time to 
engage in meditations, such as those [just described]. In this case, 
therefore, the method of instantaneous consciousness transference 
becomes most important. Since it is unknown what the circum­
stances of one's death will be, one should, from this very moment, 
alternate one's training, sometimes practising the consciousness­
transference technique of the training phase, [described earlier], 
and sometimes practising the instantaneous consciousness trans­
ference. 
The [practice] should be undertaken in the following manner: CONSCIOU~NE~S rRAI'.;~fERENCE 213 
One should establish a clear and mindful resolution, thinking, 'If 
I die suddenly, my mental focus should be directed towards the 
crown of my head!' This resolution is extremely important. It is 
similar, for example, to the resolution of someone who thinks that 
one should get up and leave [home] when the moon rises on the 
twenty-second day [of the lunar month]. If [this mental focus] is 
continuously maintained during the evening of the [day before], 
one will [actually J awaken when the moon rises, just after mid­
night. In exactly this way, from this very moment onwards, one 
should practise projecting one's mental focus upwards to the crown 
of the head whenever strong fear arises. 
Then, when 'sudden death' docs occur, as when falling straight 
over a steep precipice, the thought will arise, 'I am dying!' As soon 
as this happens, it would be best if one were to fervently recall 
one's spiritual teacher, or recall one's particular meditational deity, 
[as being present, seated] on the crown of one's head. Even if there 
is not sufficient time to make this recollection, it is essential to 
project one's mental focus upwards towards the crown of one's 
head. The rea·son for doing so is that even [ordinarily] now, when 
strong fear arises, we tend to cry out, '0 father! spiritual teacher!' 
[Similarly! therefore, at the moment [of sudden death] also, it is 
certainly possible that one will recollect one's teacher, or [if one 
has trained in this practice] that one will focus one's awareness at 
the crown of one's head [instinctively]. This is the most profound 
crucial point. 
Likewise, were one to be engulfed by a great fire, or swiftly 
carried away by a mighty river, or struck on the head by lightning, 
or pierced by an arrow through the heart, one must immediately 
recollect one's spiritual teacher, [as being seated] on the crown of 
the head, or alternatively one must [at least] direct one's awareness 
to the crown of the head. This is called the 'instantaneous con­
sciousness transference', and it is also known as the 'forceful con­
sciousness transference'. As this is most profound, one should train 
one's mind assiduously fin this technique]. 
Moreover, it is said that at times when ordinary people experi­
ence strong fears, there are many advantages when they simply cry 
out '0 father! spiritual teacher!' or invoke the name of a buddha, 
saying, '0 Orgyan!'211 If this is so, the benefits of [additionally] 
directing one's mental focus towards the spiritual teacher, present 
on the crown of the head, are inconceivable. THE TIBETA:-.1 BOOK OF THE Dl:AIJ 
There are, altogether, nine different pathways through which 
consciousness transference can occur, and these are associated with 
persons of superior, average, and inferior capacity. The aperture of 
the crown fontanelle is the pathway through which [consciousness] 
departs to the pure [realm of the] sky-farers. Given this, fit is 
said that] one \viii attain liberation if awareness exits through the 
[crown fontanelle]. Since this is the supreme pathway, it is 
extremely important that one trains in directing one's mental focus 
towards this [aperture]. Furthermore, if consciousness is trans­
ferred through the pathway of the eyes, [it is said that) one will be 
born as a universal monarch, and if it is transferred through the 
left nostril, one will obtain an unimpaired human body. These are 
the three optimum apertures I associated with those of superior 
capacity]. 
One will, however, be born as a yak~a if [consciousness is trans­
ferred I through the right nostril, or as a god of the world-system 
of form if lit is transferred] through the ears, and as a god of the 
world-system of desire if [it is transferred I through the navel. These 
are the three medial apertures [associated with those of average 
capacity]. Lastly, one will be born as an animal if [it is transferred] 
through the urethra, as a anguished spirit if I it is transferred) 
through the sexual passage/" and as a hell being if it is transferred 
through the rectum. These are the three inferior apertures [associ­
ated with those of inferior capacity]. Given that there are such 
very great consequential differences between the various apertures 
through which consciousness transference may occur, there will 
be inestimable benefits in directing one's awareness to the crown 
of the head, at the time of death. 
Such is the forceful consciousness transference. SAMA Y A! 
Consciousness Transference of Ordinary Beings 
In the case of those who have not realised the meaning of empti­
ness, and who do not know the significance of the generation and 
perfection stages I of meditation], it is the consciousness transfer­
ence of ordinary beings which should be applied as follows·: The 
head [of the dying person] should point north, with the body lyirig 
down on the right side. A spiritual teacher or fellow practitioner 
should then remind [the dying person] to pay attention, and if 
health permits, he or she should be encouraged to take refuge, to CO!'\SCIOLJS!\:ESS TRA!'\SFE){I:.!':CE 215 
cultivate an altruistic intention, and to confess negativity. Then, 
the teacher should confer the vows of the Buddhist laity, and if 
there is time, the empowerments of the way of secret mantras 
should be conferred. Consequently, by dying with a positive 
momentum of past actions, the individual who has ljust received] 
these untainted commitments and vows, with respect to the nature 
of reality, w will be liberated from inferior existences, and there 
will be inestimable advantages. 
In the case of a person who cannot do even that, one should 
slowly call out the name [of the dying one], saying, 'Lord Mahaka­
rul)ika is present on the crown of your head! Be reverential!' One 
should stroke the crown of his or her head and gently pull the hair 
above the crown fontanelle. Thereby, the consciousness will [be 
encouraged to] exit from the crown fontanelle. 
In the case of those who cannot do even that, and whose capacity 
is indistinguishable from that of animals, one should repeat the 
words, many times, 'Homage to Buddha Ratnaketu!', directing 
these [words] towards the head [of the dying person]. As a conse­
quence, they will certainly be liberated from [rebirth in] the inferior 
existences, because, when in the past this buddha made his aspir­
ational prayer, he did so, saying, '~lay all who hear my name be 
liberated from f rebirth inJ the inferior existences!' Alternatively, if 
one calls out the name of the [Medicine J Buddha Bhai~ajyaguru 
Vaif;ioryaprabharaja, it is said that just by hearing his name, [the 
dying person] will be protected from the sufferings of inferior 
existences. Similarly, one may c.11l out the name of whichever 
buddha one may know, and recite whichever blessed heart-mantra 
one may know, such as the Six-syllable .\;1anrra. 
In particular, if one has at hand the Liberation by Wearing, lt 
one should read this aloud, and also recite the Liberation by 
Hearing, '2 repeating whichever aspirational prayers one may 
know. Since the positive momentum of [the dying person's] past 
actions can thereby be secured, this will be most advantageous. In 
the worst cases, it is said that simply by dying with the body lying 
down on the right side and the head pointing north, [that person] 
will not proceed into inferior existences. 216 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
CONCLUSION 
In summary, since it is essential that all the advantages [that accrue 
from] practising the teachings should converge at the time of death, 
it is extremely important to become skilled [during one's lifetime] 
in the process of dying. 
[This completes] the Guide to the Intermediate State of the Time 
of Death entitled Consciousness Transference: Natural Liberation 
through Recollection. 
SAMAYA! rgya rgya rgya! 11 
The Great Liberation by Hearing CONTEXT 
Traditionally, the procedures followed when a lama visits a dying or 
deceased person are intricate and prolonged, and will vary depending 
on whether the person is about to die, has just recently died, or has 
been dead for some days. 
When a person is approaching death, it is customary for the 
relatives or close friends to seek the assistance of a fully qualified 
lama. The lama should be motivated by a sincere compassion for 
all sentient beings and should have mastered in his own mental 
continuum the direct experiential cultivation of the dying processes, 
as well as the consciousness transference practices. 
It is very important that when coming in to the household, the 
attending lama is concentrated on the motivation to free the dying 
person from the sufferings of cyclic existence. Very often the mere 
presence of an accomplished lama can create a solid sense of calm 
and purposefulness, which inspires both the dying person and family. 
The formal practice begins with the attending lama taking refuge 
in the Buddha, the sacred teachings, and the ideal spiritual com­
munity, on behalf of the dying person and all other sentient beings, 
including himself. At this point, the lama should visualise in the 
space in front of himself images of the three objects of refuge-the 
Buddha, sacred teachings and ideal community -forming a tree, 
whose branches like billowing clouds in the sky are adorned by 
budd has, bodhisattvas and the spiritual masters of the lineage. Then 
he should visualise that the dying person, surrounded by all sentient 
beings, takes refuge by reciting the following verses three times: 
I take refuge from now until enlightenment, 
In the Buddha, the [sacred] teachings and the supreme 
assembly. 22.0 THE TIHETAN 1\00K 01' TilE DEAD 
Through the merit of practising generosity and the other 
[perfections I, 
May I attain buddhahood for the sake of [all] living beings. 
Maintaining this same visualisation, the lama should slowly recite 
with full concentration the four immeasurable aspirations, based on 
the cultivation of loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and 
equanimity. 
~1ay all sentient beings be endo\ved with happiness! 
May they all be separated from suffering and its causes! 
May they be endowed with joy, free from suffering! 
May they abide in equanimity, free from attraction and 
aversion! 
Up to this point, the preliminary procedures are common to all the 
traditions ofTibetan Buddhism. Next, the lama should enter into the 
practice of the Natural Liberation of Habitual Tendencies, as presented 
in Chapter 5· During the practice of the initial ten-branched prayer 
(contained in Chapter 5), the refuge tree is still visualised in the 
space in front. As the ten-branched prayer is concluded the lama 
visualises that all the objects of refuge melt into light and then 
gradually dissolve into the crowns of each of the attending persons, 
including the dying person and himself. So at this point the body, 
speech and mind of all enlightened beings, the objects of refuge, 
become indivisible from the lama's own body, speech, and mind and 
those of all others present. Like water poured into water they become 
inseparably one in nature. In this way, it is visualised that all those 
present are brought under the protection of the Three Precious 
Jewels. 
Then, like a bubble emerging from water, the lama visualises 
himself arising out of emptiness in the form of Vajrasattva and he 
continues with the practice of the Natural Liberation of Habitual 
Tendencies. Once this practice is complete, extensive mental offerings 
should then be made to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and the 
lama should slowly recite three or seven times the short prayer 
entitled an Aspirational Prayer [Calling] to the Buddhas and Bodhisattva~ 
for Assistance (see Chapter 12), followed by the accompanying aspir­
ational prayers. This is often followed by a series of more general 
recitations from the Buddhist canon, including the Sutra of the Three TilE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING 221 
Heaps (Triskandhakasutra, T 284), dedicated to the Thirty-five 
Buddhas of Confession, the recitation of the names of the thousand 
budd has of this aeon, following the arrangement of SakyasrT of Kash­
mir, entitled Ornate Garland of the Auspicious Aeon (Bhadrakalpikal­
aty~karamala, T n6g), together with the recitation of the mantras 
given in the Tantra of the Purification of All Lower Destinies (Sarvadur­
gatiparisodhanatantra, T 483). Just to hear these names is said to 
make a powerful impact on the consciousness of the dying person. 
At this point, the lama has to be very observant of the dying person. 
Excessive preoccupation with the completion of these recitations 
may distract him from seizing the moment when the dying person's 
consciousness actually leaves the body. Carefully observing the signs 
of death, as indicated in the Natural Liberation through Recognition of 
the Visual Indications and Signs of Death (Chapter 8), just before 
the person passes away, the lama should immediately begin the 
introduction to the intermediate state of the time of death (the first 
part of the present chapter), even if the previous recitations are 
unfinished. In certain circumstances, mouth to mouth resuscitation 
might be given, in accordance with the cycle entitled Eight Transmitted 
Precepts: Oral Transmission of the Awareness Holder (bKa'-brgyad 
rig-'dzin zhal-lung), which was revealed by the Fifth Dalai Lama, or an 
equivalent text. This may maintain life for a short period while final 
guidance is given. 
Accordingly, the dying one should be guided through the processes 
of the dissolution of the elements (as set out in Chapter 8), before 
continuing with the introduction to the intermediate state of the time 
of death, as set out in this chapter. Usually, the dying person is 
addressed by name, or by the expression 'child of buddha nature' 
(rigs-kyi bu). One who is worthy of great respect is addressed by an 
expression such as 'venerable one', 'spiritual master', 'teacher', or 
'your ladyship' and so forth. If it is someone from whom the attend­
ing lama has personally received teaching, he may use the expression 
'IJrd of the refuge' (skyabs-mgon) or 'great lama' (bla-chen), and so 
forth. There are different modes of address. 
The voice of the lama who calls out to the dying person should 
be very melodious, so that merely upon hearing the sound of the 
instructions the person feels soothed, elevated and attracted. 
Following the outer dissolution of the four elements and the inner 
dissolution of the processes of conceptual thought into redness, 
whiteness and blackness, the lama should recite the verses describing 222 THE TIBETAN BOOK Or TilE lJI:AD 
the moment of the arising of the inner radiance of the ground. These 
words of introduction should be read aloud three times. If the dying 
person fails to recognise the first inner radiance and swoons into 
unconsciousness, the lama should proceed with the introduction 
to the second inner radiance followed by the introduction to the 
emergence of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities during the intermedi­
ate state of reality. 
Once the introduction to the intermediate state of reality has been 
completed, the attending lama should closely observe the body of 
the deceased and seek to determine whether he or she has attained 
liberation from rebirth in cyclic existence. If emancipation has 
occurred, the body will take on a certain glow, and while being in its 
presence, one will experience a sensation of happiness. The body 
will not smell. It will look just like a living person who is sleeping. 
These are signs that the consciousness of the deceased has attained 
liberation. In addition, external environmental signs may arise, as 
described in Chapter 8, including distinctive cloud formations and 
rainbows. If the deceased is a realised yogin, monk or layperson who 
has gained complete freedom at the time of death, then the attending 
lama may hear the sound of chanting and the music of sacred 
instruments, such as the skull drum or bell. On the other hand, if 
the consciousness of the deceased has not been emancipated, the 
complexion of the deceased will become disquieting and may inspire 
a sense of fear when it is seen. The face will become grey and dusty, 
and the body will begin to decompose very quickly. 
If the consciousness of the deceased does not attain liberation 
while in the intermediate state of reality, the mental body assumed 
by the deceased will then immediately fall into the intermediate 
state of rebirth, at which time, the attending lama should recite the 
introduction to that phase, as presented in the latter part of this 
chapter. 
Importantly, these introductions to the three intermediate states 
of the time of death, reality and rebirth should be supplemented, if 
appropriate, by the practice of the transference of consciousness, as 
presented in Chapter 10. If the internal and external signs are v,ery 
good, consciousness transference will not be necessary and could 
even be potentially harmful. 
The attending lama must take great care as to if and when con­
sciousness transference should be practised. It is not only highly THE GREAT LIBERATIO:'II BY IIF.ARI:-.iG 223 
realised spiritual masters who remain in meditation during these 
intermediate states, but even ordinary men, women, and children 
may have achieved a settled state of mind, enabling them to remain 
in peaceful and deep meditation after death. If consciousness trans­
ference were performed in such cases, the deceased would be dis­
turbed. Moreover, since the consciousness of the deceased has a 
tendency to leave the body from whichever point it is touched, the 
relatives, loved ones and the attending lama should refrain from 
touching the body or only tap the crown fontanelle in order to induce 
the consciousness to leave from that point. 
If the attending lama decides that consciousness transference is 
the appropriate course of action, it should be repeated many times 
until certain indications occur, such as the emergence of mucous or 
blood from both nostrils. Further, in order to induce the conscious­
ness to leave the body via the crown, which is the optimum gateway 
for the transference to take effect, the means of preventing the 
consciousness from leaving through other orifices as described in 
Chapter 1 o should be applied. This is facilitated by visual ising that 
the nine orifices of the body are each sealed by a single H 0 ty1 syllable, 
thus forcing the consciousness to exit via the crown fontanelle. 
In any event, if the attending lama feels that the consciousness of 
the deceased has become confused and trapped, or if the corpse 
begins to decompose and lose its radiance, then consciousness 
transference should be immediately performed. 
Once the introductions to the intermediate states of the time of 
death, reality, and rebirth have been concluded, the attending lama 
should then recite: the Prayer for Union with the Spiritual Teacher 
(Chapter 2), the Natural Liberation of Habitual Tendencies (Chapter 
5), the Hundredfold Homage (Chapter 6), the Confession (Chapter 7), 
and the Liberation by Wearing (Chapter 14). 
At this juncture the attending lama may read certain general 
prayers not included within the present cycle, such as the Aspirational 
Prayer for Good Conduct (Bodhisattvaprat:~idhanaraja, T 1095), one of 
the many versions of the Aspirational Prayer for Rebirth in Sukhavatr 
(contained in bDe-smon Phyogs-sgrigs), the Aspirational Prayer of Mai­
treya (Maitreyaprat:~idhana, T 1096), and the final chapter of the 
Introduction to the Conduct of a Bodhisattva (Bodhisattvacaryavatara, 
T 3871), which concerns the dedication of merit on behalf of all 
sentient beings. 224 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
These may be followed by a further recitation of prayers specific 
to the present cycle, namely the: Root Verses of the Six Intermediate 
States (Chapter 3) and the Aspirationa/ Prayers (Chapter 12). 
This completes the summary of the process through which the 
attending lama tends directly to the consciousness of the dying 
person and the deceased. PART ONE 
An Elucidation of the Intermediate State of the Time 
of Death and of the Appearance of the Peaceful Deities 
in the Intermediate State of Reality 
Herein is contained the Great Liberation by Hearing, 1 an eluci­
dation of the intermediate state of reality, [which is an extract] 
from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teach­
ing, [entitled] Natural Liberation through [Recognition on 
Enlightened lntention.2 
I bow down to the spiritual teachers, [embodiment of] the 
Three Buddha-bodies: 
To the Buddha-body of Reality, Infinite Light, Amitabha; 
To the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Lotus Deities; 
And to the Buddha-body of Emanation, Padmakara, protector 
of beings. 
This Great Liberation by Hearing, the skilful means which liber­
ates yogins of average ability during the intermediate states, has 
three parts, namely: the introduction, the main subject matter [of 
the text] and the conclusion. 
INTRODUCTION 
[All aspirants] should experientially cultivate the steps of guid-
_ance/ which are the means by which corporeal beings can achieve 
liberation. Those of highest acumen should certainly attain libera­
tion [in their lifetime] through [the application of] that guidance. 
But if liberation does not occur thereby, [yogins] should imple­
ment, during the intermediate state of the time of death, [the 
appropriate procedure outlined in] the Consciousness Transfer­
ence: Natural Liberation through Recollection. 4 Yogins of average 22.6 TilE TIBETAl' BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
ability should certainly be liberated by that. If liberation is not 
effected by the [application of consciousness transference], then 
[the recitation of] the following Great Liberation by Hear­
ing should be persistently made Juring the intermediate state of 
reality. 
First, therefore, yogins should examine the signs of death in 
accordance with the text entitled Natural Liberation through 
f Recognition off the Visual Indications and Signs of Death, also 
known as the Mirror which Clarifies the Visible Indications of 
Death.s Thereupon, when the [inner] signs of the processes of 
death are definitively and completely present, I the appropriate 
procedure as outlined in J the Consciousness Translerence: Natural 
Liberation thrott?,h Recollection should be applied. Thus, if this 
transference is effective, there will be no need to read aloud the 
Great l-iberation by Hearing. 
If, however, the transference is ineffective, this Liberation by 
Hearing should be read aloud with correct pronunciation and clear 
diction, close to the corpse. If the corpse is not present, one should 
sit next to the bed or scat of the deceased. Then, having invoked 
the power of truth6 and summoned the consciousness r of the 
deceased],7 one should imagine him or her to be listening in one's 
presence and read aloud [this Great Liberation by He.lring]. At 
this time the relatives and close friends should I be advised to] show 
restraint because, at this stage, it is not appropriate to cry or 
dramatically express one's grief.x 
If the deceased's body is present, then during the interval which 
follows the ceasing of respiration,'~ this Great Liberation by 
He.~ring should be read aloud by a spiritual teacher, or by a 
spiritual sibling, sincere [practitioner], or a sympathetic friend, 
placing the lips [close] to the car [of the deceased], without actually 
touching.10 
THE ~1AIN SUBJECT !vlATTER 
Now follows the actual exegesis of the l.iberation by Hearing: 
first, one should make extensive offerings to the Three Precious 
Jewels.11 If these are unobtainable, one should make offerings 
by arraying whatever one has as a support for visualisation and 
mentally emanating an immeasurable [quantity of offerings]. Then TIIF CREAT LIBERATI0:-.1 BY HEARI!'G 227 
one should recite, three or seven times, the Aspirational Prayer 
{Callmgj to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas for Assistance. After 
this, one should melodiously recite the Aspirational Prayer which 
Protects from Fear of the Intermediate States, the Aspirational 
Prayer which Rescues from the Dangerous Pathways of the Inter­
mediate States and the Root Verses of the [Six/ Intermediate 
States.12 
Thereafter, this Great Liberation by Hearing is to be read aloud 
seven or three times, or [as many times] as the circumstances 
permit. 
[The main subject matter of the Great Liberation by Hearing] 
comprises three sections: the introduction to inner radiance during 
the intermediate state of the time of death, 11 the great elucidation 
which introduces the intermediate state of reality14 and a teaching 
on the means for obstructing the entrance to the womb during the 
intermediate state of rcbirrh.15 
Introduction to Inner Radiance in the Intermediate 
State of the Time of Death 
This introduction is made on behalf of those individuals who have 
good understanding, but do not yet have recognition l of inner 
radiance], as well as those who have gained recognition but have 
little familiarity, and all ordinary persons who have received little 
experiential guidance. By means of [this introduction], such beings 
will, upon recognising the inner radiance of the ground, attain the 
uncreated Buddha-body of Reality, in an ascending and core­
penetrating manner, without [experiencing] the intermediate 
states. 
Introduction to the Inner Radiance of the Ground 
As for the method of making [this introduction], it is best if the 
root spiritual teacher from whom [the dying person] personally 
received guidance can be present. If he cannot be present, then a 
spiritual sibling with identical commitments16 [should be called 
upon], or if none of these can be present, then a spiritual friend 
holding the same lineage17 should attend; or if none of these at all 
can be present, someone who knows how to read aloud with 
correct pronunciation and clear diction should recite [the intro­
ductions] many times. Thereby, [the dying person] will remember 228 Till-. I"IIH.TA!'I BOOK OF TilE Dl::\D 
that which had [formerly] been introduced by his or her spiritual 
teacher and immediately afterwards, being set face to face with the 
inner radiance of the ground, will undoubtedly attain liberation. 
Concerning the rime for making [this introduction]: after respir­
ation has ceased, the vital energy is absorbed into the channel of 
pristine COgnition IS and the COnsciOUSneSS r of the deceased j natur­
ally arises as a non-conceptual inner radiance. Later, the viral 
energy will be reversed and escape into the right and left channels 
and, as a result, the appearances of the [subsequent] intermediate 
state [of reality] will arise suddenly. Therefore, [the introduction 
to inner radiance at the time of death] should be nude before 
[the vital energy J has escaped into the right and left channels. 
[Generally], the length of time during which the inner breath 
remains present within the central channel is just about the time 
taken to eat a meal.19 
As regards the actual mode of making [this introduction], it is 
best if the consciousness transference is effected at that moment 
when the respiration is about to cease. If it is not, one should say 
the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, (call the name of the dying person), 
the time has now come for you to seek a path. As soon as your 
respiration ceases, {the luminosity} known as the 'inner radiance of 
the first intermediate state'/0 which your spiritual teacher formerly 
introduced to you, will arise. {Immediately/ your respiration 
ceases, all phenomena will become empty and utterly naked like 
space. {At the same time/, a naked awareness U/i/1 arise, not 
extraneous {to yourself/, but radi.mt, empty and without horizon 
or centre. At that moment, you should personally recognise this 
intrinsic nature and rest in the state of that {experience/. I too will 
introduce it {to you} at that time.21 
These words should he spoken audibly many times, impressing 
them on the mind [of the dying person 1 until respiration ceases. 
Then, when the respiration is on the point of ceasing, one should 
lay [the dying person] on the right side, in the posture of the lion, 
and take the pulse.22 Once the throbbing of the two carotid arteries 
has stopped, they should be firmly pressed [at their pressure points 
on the neck].-u Then the vital energy, having entered the central THE GIU:AT LIBERATIO:o-; BY HEARI="G 
channel, cannot reverse [and escape] and it will certainly emerge 
through the crown fontanelle.24 The introduction should continue 
to be made at this time. 
This phase in the process of death is called: 'the inner radiance 
of reality during the first intermediate state'. It is the unique and 
incontrovertible enlightened intention of the Buddha-body of 
Reality, which arises in the minds of all living beings. [At the 
moment of death], this coincides with the period when the vital 
energy is absorbed into the central channel, after respiration has 
ceased and before the ceasing of the inner breath. Ordinary people 
describe this state as 'loss of consciousness'.25 
The duration of this [experience of inner radiance] is uncertain, 
[for it depends on] the health and characteristics of [the dying 
person's I physical constitution, and on the degree of [his or her 
proficiency in the practices related to 1 the vital energies and chan­
nels. For those who have considerable practical experience, or 
those who have achieved stability in the practice of calm abiding, 
or those who have healthy energy channels, this experience can be 
prolonged.26 In striving to make this introduction, therefore, one 
should remind [the deceased] repeatedly [by giving the instruction 
as above and below], until serous fluid emerges from the apertures 
of the sense-organs.27 For those persons of great negativity and 
those classes of beings with unhealthy channels this phase lasts no 
longer than a single snapping of the fingers. In others, it may last 
for as long as it takes to cat a meal. However, as most sutras and 
tantras state that the period of unconsciousness [following the 
moment of death! may last for three and a half days, generally one 
should persevere for that length of time, in making this introduc­
tion to inner radiance. 
As for the way in which this introduction is made: if capable, 
the dying person should facilitate this of his or her own accord by 
projecting a formerly cultivated [spiritual practice into the inter­
mediate state]. If [the individual] is not capable of this, then a 
spiritual teacher, a student, or a spiritual sibling who was a close 
tricnd, should stay nearby and clearly remind [the dying person] 
of the signs [of death] in their correct sequence, saying: 
Now, the sign of the dissolution of earth into water is pr~sent, of 
water into fire, fire into wind, wind into consciousness, 2j0 THE TIBETAN ROOK OF THE DE:\IJ 
and so forth [as set down in the text entitled Natural Liber.ztion 
through Recognition of the Visual Indications and Signs of 
Death].2s 
Then, when the sequence of the signs is almost complete, [the 
attendant] should encourage the dying person to cultivate the fol­
lowing altruistic intention, beginning with the words: '0, Child of 
Buddha Nature!' or, if [the dying person] is a spiritual teacher, the 
attendant should gently say the following words into the ear: 
0, Venerable One! I beg you not to be distracted from the culti­
vation of an altruistic intention! 
If l the dying person] is a spiritual sibling or anyone else, [the attend­
ant] should call to him or her by name and say the following \Vords: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, that which is called death has now 
arrived. Therefore you should adopt an ,zltruistic motiuation and 
concentrate your thinking as follows: 'I have arrived at the time 
of death, so now, relying on the process of death, I will single­
mindedly cultivate an altmistic intention. I will medilLzte on the 
generation of loving kindness, compassion and an ,zltmistic inten­
tion to attain enlightenment. For the benefit of all sentient beings, 
who are as limitless as space, I must attain perfect buddhaiJOod.' 
And in particular, {you should think}: 'At this moment, for the 
sake of all sentient beings, I must recognise /the time of} de,zth .zs 
[the arising of] inner radiance, the Buddha-body of Reality, and 
while in that state, I must attain the supreme accomplishment of 
the Great Seal, and thereby act for the good of all sentient beings. 
If I do not achieve this accomplishment, then, recognising the 
intermediate state as it is, I will actualise the coalescent Budd/Jt.z­
body of the Great Seal during the intermediate s!L1te, and thereby, 
manifesting in order to instruct each in accord.znce with his or her 
needs, I will act for the benefit of all sentient beings, who are as 
limitless as space.' \'1/ithout giuing up the focus on cultivating 
an altruistic intention, in the above way, recollect the medit,ztive 
experiences whidJ you formerly developed 011 the basis of the otal 
te.zchings. 
Those words should be clearly spoken, while placing the lips close 
to the car I of the dying person 1. Without permitting the attention TilE GREAT LlgFRATIO!'< BY l-IEARISG 23 I 
[of the dying one! to be distracted even for an instant, [the attend­
anti should remind him or her of past meditative experiences. 
Then, when the respiration has ceased, and the two carotid 
arteries have been firmly pressed, remind [the dying person] with 
the following words, if the individual was a spiritual teacher or a 
spiritual friend greater than oneself: 
Venerable One! The inner radiance of the ground is now arisen 
before you. Recognise it, and concentrate directly on its experi­
ential cultivation. 
For all others, one should introduce [the inner radiance of the 
ground!, with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, (call the name of the individual) 
listen! Pure inner radiance, reality itself, is now arising before you. 
Recognise it! 0, Child of Buddha Nature, this radiant essence that 
is now your conscious awareness is a brilliant emptiness. It is 
beyond substance, beyond characteristics and beyond colour, com­
pletely empty of inherent existence in any respect whatsoever. This 
is the female Buddha Samantabhadri, the essential nature of reality. 
The essence of your own conscious awareness is emptiness. Yet, 
this is not a vacuous or nihilistic emptiness; this, your very own 
conscious awareness, is zmimpedcdly radiant, brilliant and vibrant. 
This [conscious awareness/ is the male Buddha Samantabhadra. 
The utterly indivisible presence of these two: the essence of your 
own awareness, tuhich is empty, without inherent existence with 
respect to any substance whatsoeuer, and your own conscious 
azl!areness, which is vibrant and radiantly present, is the Buddha­
body of Reality. This intrinsic awareness, manifest in a great mass 
of light, in which radiance and emptiness are indivisible, is the 
buddha [nature/ of unchanging light, beyond birth or death. Just 
to recognise this is enough! If you recognise this brilliant essence 
ofyour own conscious awareness to be the buddha [nature/, then 
to gaze into intrinsic awareness is to abide in the enlightened 
intention of all the buddhus. 
This introduction should be made three or seven times, with correct 
pronuncic1tion and clear diction. Accordingly, [the deceased! will 
firstly recollect lthe teachings! as they had been formerly given by 232 THE TIBET:\Jii BOOK OF THE DEAD 
his or her teacher, and secondly be introduced to inner radiance 
as a naked natural awareness. And then, thirdly, having recognised 
this, he or she will attain the Buddha-body of Reality, beyond 
conjum:tion or disjunction, and certainly achieve liberation. 
Recognition of the 'first inner radiance' [of the ground] takes place 
in this way. 
[Introduction to the Inner Radiance of the Path j 
If, however, it is feared that [the deceased] has not recognised the 
first inner radiance, the so-called 'second inner radiance' [of the 
path] will arise. !Again, it is said that this second inner radiance] 
lasts a little more than the time it takes to eat a meal, after the 
respiration has ceased. Specifically, it arises once the vital energy 
has escaped into the right or left channel, whichever is appropriate 
depending on the positive and negative past actions [of the 
deceased], and once the vital energy has emerged through one of 
the orifices of the body.2
<J When this occurs, the consciousness 
suddenly becomes awake and lucid. 
Although it is said that this second inner radiance also lasts 
[approximately] for as long as it takes to eat a meal, this actually 
depends, as before, on whether or not the energy channels are 
healthy and whether or not [the individual] has or lacks meditative 
expenence. 
Now, at this point, the consciousness emerges from the body 
and, !initially], the individual may not know whether or not he or 
she has died. The relatives are seen as before, and their cries of 
sorrow can be heard. During this period, before the harsh and 
bewildering experiences related to past actions have arisen, and 
before the terrifying experiences related to Yama have occurred, 
the oral teaching should be given.w This [oral teaching] concerns 
both the perfection stage and the generation stage [of meditation]. 
If [the deceased I was engaged in [the practices of] the perfection 
stage, one should call to him or her three times, by name, and 
repeat the above !instruction, which is] the introduction to inner 
radiance. If [the deceased] was engaged in [the practices of] the 
generation stage, one should read aloud the formal description 
of the individual's chosen meditational deity as set down in the 
corresponding meditative cycle. Then remind him or her with the 
following words: THE GRI:-.AT LIBERATIOI" BY IIEARI:-.G 233 
0, Child of Buddha Nature! lvteditate on this, your nzeditational 
deity. Do 1lot be distracted! Concentrate intently on your medi­
tational deity! Meditate that [the deity/ appears, and yet is without 
inherent existence, like [the reflection o(J the moon in water. Do 
not medit,lte on the deity as a solid corporeal form!31 
If [the deceased] was an ordinary person, without a specific prac­
tice, then preface the introduction with the following words: 
Meditate on the Lord of Great Compassion!12 
By means of such an introduction, there is no doubt that even 
those who have not recognised !the nature of] the intermediate 
state will do so. 
This, I the above] precise reminder, should be given by a spiritual 
teacher or sibling to those who, despite having already received 
this introduction from a spiritual teacher while they were alive, 
have an undeveloped meditative experience, and accordingly will 
not recognise the intermediate state by themselves. Equally, this 
instruction is of crucial importance in the case of those who, despite 
their meditative experience, are bewildered by serious illness at the 
moment of death and therefore cannot recall [their past meditative 
experiences]; and finally, it is particularly necessary in the case of 
those beings who, despite their former meditative experience, are at 
risk of falling into lower existences as a result of having broken their 
vo\vs and having failed to maintain their basic commitments.33 
[As stated above], it is best if [recognition] occurs during the 
first intermediate state. However, if it does not occur therein, 
awareness can be awakened and liberation attained during the 
second intermediate state. This second intermediate state is also 
called 'the pure illusory body'. [During this second phase], con­
sciousness achieves an instance of clarity, even though the deceased 
may not know whether or not they arc dead. If the teaching is given 
at this time, therefore, the mother and child aspects of reality can 
mcct,14 and [the deceased] will no longer be controlled by the force 
of past actions. just as, for example, darkness is destroyed by the 
light of the sun, the controlling force of past actions is destroyed by 
this 'inner radiance of the path' and liberation is attained. 
Now, this so-called 'second intermediate state' [occurring at that 
point when consciousness leaves the body] is one which suddenly THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
appears to the 'mental body' [assumed by the deceased]/) while the 
consciousness [of the deceased] retains the same range of hearing as 
before. If the above oral teaching is given at this time, its purpose 
can therefore be accomplished. Since the bewildering appearances 
generated by past actions have not yet arisen, [the deceased] is able 
to direct his or her attention anywhere. Therefore, even though 
[the individual] may not have attained recognition of the inner 
radiance of the ground, he or she will be liberated by the recog­
nition of the inner radiance [of the path], which is the second 
intermediate state. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE INTERNlEDIATE 
STATE OF REALITY 
If liberation is still not attained through the above [introductions], 
then the intermediate state of reality, also called 'the third inter­
mediate state', will arise.36 It is during this third phase that the 
bewildering apparitions, [which are the products] of past actions, 
emerge. Therefore, it is extremely important to read aloud the 
following Great Introduction to the lnternzedi.1fe State of Re,zlityF 
at this juncture. It is most powerful and beneficial. 
At around this time, the bereaved relatives will be crying and 
expressing their grief. They will no longer be serving [the 
deceased's] share of food, they will have removed his or her clothes, 
and stripped down the bed, and so forth. Although [the deceased] 
can see them, they cannot see the deceased. Although the deceased 
can hear them calling out, they cannot hear the departed one 
calling back. So, [the deceased] may turn away in a state of despair. 
At this time, three phenomena: sounds, lights and rays of light 
will arise, and I the deceased] may faint with fear, terror or a·we. 
Thus, during this period, the following Great Introduction to the 
Intermediate State of Reality should be given. Call the deceased 
by name and say the following words, with correct pronunciation 
and clear diction: 
0, Child of BuddiJLl Nature, listen very intently and without dis­
traaion. There are six kinds of intermediate st11te, namely: the 
intermediute state of living or natural existence, the intermedi.zte THE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING 235 
state of dreams, the intermediate state of meditative stability or 
concentration, the intermediate state of the time of death, the 
intermediate shzte of reality, and the intermediate state of conse­
quent rebirth. Js 0, Child of Buddha Nature, [during and after 
death], you will experience three intermediate states: the inter­
mediate stt.lte of the time of death, the intermediate state of reality 
and the intermediate state of rebirth. Of these three, it was the 
intermediate state of the time of death which you experienced until 
yesterday. Although the inner radiance of reality arose during that 
time, you did not recognise it. So now, [as a result], you have 
been compelled to wander here; and now you will experience the 
intermedi.zte state of reality, followed by the intermediate state of 
rebirth. You must therefore recognise, without distraction, [the 
instruction and events] which I am now going to introduce to 
you. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, that which is called death has now 
arrived. You are leaving this world. But in this you are not alone. 
This happens to eueryone. Do not be attached to this life! Do not 
cling to this life! Even if you remain attached and clinging, you do 
not have the power to st.1y-you will only continue to roam within 
the cycles of existence. Therefore, do not be attached and do not 
cling! Think of the Three Precious Jewels! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, however terrifving the ap­
pearances of the intermediate st.zte of reality might be, do not 
forget the following words. Go forward remembering their mean­
ing. The crucial point is that through them recognition may be 
attained. 
Alas, now, as the intermediate state of reality arises before me, 
Renouncing the merest thought of awe, terror or fear, 
I will recog11ise all that arises to be awareness, rnanifesting 
naturally of itself. 
Knowing such [sounds, lights and rays] to be visionary 
phenomena of the intermediate state. 
At this nzome11t, having reached this critical point, 
I must not fear the assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 
which manifest naturally! 
Go forward, reciting these words distinctly and be mindful of their 
meaning. Do 110t forget them! For it is essential to recognise, with 236 THE TIBETAN BOOK Ol-TilE DEAD 
certainty, that whatever terrifying experiences may arise, they are 
natural manifestations [of actual reality}. 0, Child of Buddha 
Nature, when your mind and body separate, the pure [luminous} 
apparitions of reality itself, will arise: subtle and clear, radiant and 
dazzling, naturally bright and awesome, shimmering like a mirage 
on a plain in summer. Do not fear them! Do not be terrified! Do 
not be awed! They are the natura/luminosities of your own actu.zl 
reality. Therefore recognise them [as they are}! 
From within these lights, the natural sound of re~.zlity will 
resound, clear and thunderous, reverberating like a thousand sim­
ultaneous peals of thunder. This is the natural sound of your own 
actual reality. So, do not be afraid! Do not be terrified! Do not be 
awed! The body that you now haue is called a 'mental body', it is 
the fJroduct of [subtle] propensities and not a solid corporeal body 
of flesh and blood. Therefore, whatever sounds, lights or rays may 
arise, they cannot harm you. r'or you are beyond death now! It is 
enough that you simply recognise [the sounds and luminosities] to 
be manifestations of your own factual reality]. Know that this is 
the intermediate state! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if you do not now recognise [these 
phenomena] to be natural manifestations, whatever meditative 
practices you may have undertaken whilst in the human world, if 
you have not [previously/ encountered this present instruction, you 
will fear the light, you will be awed by the sound and you will be 
terrified by the rays. If you do not now understand this essenti,zl 
point of the teaching, you u•illnot recognise the sounds, the lights 
and the rays, and you will continue to roam within the cycles of 
existence. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, should you hat•e moued on, {tl!ith­
out recognition/, after hauing been unconscious for [up to] three 
and a half days,''~ you will awaken from unconsciousness and 
wonder, "What has happened to me?" So, recognise this to be the 
intermediate state! At this time, the aspects of the cycles of exist­
ence are reversed [into their own true nature] and all phenonzena 
are arising as lights and buddha-bodies. 40 
[On the first day of the intermediate state of reality/,41 all sfJilce 
will arise as a blue light. At this time, from the central Buddha 
field called Peruasiue Seminal Point, 42 the transcendent lord Vairo­
cana wi/1 dawn before you, his body white in colour, seated on a 
lion throne, holding in his [right] hand an eight-spoked wheel and THF GREAT LIBERATI0::-.1 UY IIEAR!l"'G 237 
embraced by his consort Akasadhatufsuarf. A blue luminosity, 
radiant and clear, bright ~.md d .. lZzling, {indicatiue of] the pristine 
cognition of re~.1lity 's expanse, which is the nutural punty of your 
aggregate of consciousness, (will emanate} from the heart of Vairo­
c .. m.z and his consort, and it will shine piercingly before you fat the 
level of your heart, with such brilliance/ that your eyes cannot bear 
it. Together with this {luminosity/, a dull white light, {indicative 
of the realm/ of the gods, will .. 1lso dawn directly before you {and 
touch your heart}. At this time, under the sway of negative past 
actions, you u•ill (tl'ish to] flee in fear and terror from the bright 
blue light, tohich is the pristine cognition of reulity's expanse, and 
you tui/1 come to perceive the dull white light o{ the god (realms} 
with delight. At this moment, do not be awed by the blue lumin­
osity, which is radiant and d,uzling, clear and very bright. This is 
the supreme inner radiance (of pristine cognition}! Do not be 
terrified! This is the light ray of the Tathagata, which is called the 
pristine cognition of reality's expanse. 43 Have confidence in it! Be 
dr,zwn to it with longing deuotion! Pray, with deuotion, thinking: 
'This is the light r,zy of the transcendent lord Vairocana 's com­
p,zssion. I take refuge in it.' For this, in reulity, is the transcendent 
lord V,zirocana and his consort come to escort you on the danger­
(JUS p,lthw .. zy of the intermediate state. This is the light ray of 
Vairocana 's comfhlssion! Therefore do not delight in the dull white 
light of the god (reulmsf! Do not be attached to it! Do not cling to 
it! This dull white light is the inl'iting p,zth created by your own 
habitual tendencies {or deep delusion, which )'Ott yourself haue 
ge1wrated.44 I{ you become attached to it, )'OH will roam within 
the god realms und be drawn into {the cycles of existence of} the 
six clusses of beings. [This dull light} is an obstruction blocking 
the {hzth to liberation. Do not look ut it! Be devoted to the bright 
blue light! Focus intently on the tr,mscendent lord V,zirocana and 
repeat alter me the following uspiratiunal prayer: 
0, as I ro~.1m in cyclic existence [driuenf by deep-seated 
delusion, 
May the transcendent lord Vairoc,llta draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of reality's expanse. 
May the supreme consort ( Akasafdhatvrsvarr support me fronz 
behind, TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
And, thus fencircledj, may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the /cue/ of an utterly perfect buddha. 
By making this aspirational pr,zyer with feruent devotion, you will 
dissolue into rainbow light in the heart of Vairocmza and his 
consort, and you will attain buddlhzhood, as the Buddha-body of 
Perfect Resource, in the central Buddha field of the Dense Array 
(Ghan,wyttlhz). 
If, however, even after receiving this introduction, as the result of 
negative obscuration and aversion, I the deceased] arc nonetheless 
overawed by the lights and rays, and turn away, and even if, after 
repeating the aspirational prayer, they remain bewildered, then, 
on the second day, Vajrasattva's assembly of deities will come to 
escort them, and, at that same time, the negative past actions which 
are conducive to a rebirth in the helllrealms] will also emerge. 
Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should be 
given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha N,llure, listen without distraction. On the 
second day the purity of the entire element water will arise in the 
form of a white light. At that time, from the eastern Buddha field 
of Manifest Joy (Abhirati), the transcendent lord Ak~obhya­
Vajras,zttva will dawn before you, his body blue in colour, holding 
in his fright/ hand a fiue-fJronged vajra, seated on an eleplhmt 
throne ,md embraced by his consort Buddhaloc.ma. They are 
encircled by two male hodhisattuas, K~itig,zrbha and Maitreya, 
and two {emale bodhisattuas, Lasyd and Pu~pd, thus, six buddha­
bodies will be shi11i11g before you from within a space of rainbow 
light. 
A [brilliant} white light, findicatiue of} the mirror-like pristine 
cognition, which is the natural purity of the aggregate of {orm, 
white a11d dazzling, radia11t and c/e,zr [will eman,ltej from the heart 
of Vajrasattua and his consort and it will shine piercingly before 
you fat the level of your heart, with such brilliance} that your eyes 
cannot bear it. Together with this light of pristine cognition, a dull 
smoky light, [indicative of] the hell [realms}, will also dawn before 
you [and touch your he,zrtf. At th.zt time, under the sway of aver­
swn, you will [wish to} turn away in fear and terror from the THE GREAT LIBERATION BY Hl:ARING 239 
bright white light and come to perceive the dull smoky light of the 
hel/frealmsj with delight. At that moment, you should fearlessly 
recognise the white light, white and dazzling, radiant and clear, to 
be pristine cognition. Have confidence in it! Be drawn to it with 
longing devotion! Pray with devotion, thinking: 'This is the light 
ray of the transcendent lord Vajrasattva 's compassion. I take ref­
uge in it.' This, in reality, is Vajrasattva and his consort come to 
escort you on the dangerous pathway of the intermediate state. 
This is the light-ray hook of Vajrasattva's compassion! Be devoted 
to it! Do not delight in the dull smoky light of the hell /realms}! 
This /dull light} is the inuiting path of the negative obscurations 
created by your own deep az,ersion, which you yourself have gener­
ated. If you become attached to it, you will fall into the realms of 
hell, sinking into a swamp of unbearable suffering, from which 
there will be no [immediate} opportunity for escape. [This dull 
light/ is an obstacle blocking the path to liberation. Do not look 
at it! Abandon your aversion! Do not be attached to it! Do not 
cling to it! Be devoted to the white light, r,zdiant and dazzling! 
Focus intently on the transcendent lord Vajras,zttua and recite the 
following aspiration,zl pr,zyer: 
0, as I roam in C)1clic existence [driven} by deep-seated 
aversion, 
M,zy the transcendent lord Vajrasattva draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the mirror-/ike pristine cognition. 
May the supreme consort Buddhalocana support me from 
behind, 
And, thus [encircled}, may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 
By making this aspir,ztional prayer with fervent devotion, fyouj 
u,ill dissolve into rainbow light in the he,zrt of the transcendent 
lord Vajrasattva, and you will attain buddhahood, as the Buddha­
body of Perfect Resource, in the eastern Buddha field of Manifest 
Joy (Abhirati). 
Yet, even after being introduced in this way, there arc some indi­
viduals who will turn away in fear from the light-ray hook of .qo THE TIBETAN BOOK Of TilE DEAD 
compassion, being gripped by pride and powerful negative obscur­
ation."" So it is that, on the third day, the transcendent lord Ratna­
sambhava's assembly of deities \vill come to escort [the deceased] 
and simultaneously the light path indicative of the human realm 
will emerge. 
Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should be 
given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. On the 
third day, the purity of the entire element earth will arise in the 
form o{ a yellow light. At this time, from the yellow southern 
Buddha field of the Glorious (Srimat), the transcendent lord Rat­
nusumhhava will dawn before you, his body yellow in colour, 
holding in his fright} hand a jewel, seated on a horse throne and 
embraced by his supreme consort Mamaki. They are encircled by 
two m.de bodhisattuas, Akasagarbha and Samantabhadra, and 
two female hodhisattv,zs, Malya and Dhapa, thus, six buddha­
bodies Ll'ifl be shining before you from within a sp.zce of rainbow 
light. 
A yellow light findic.ztive of} the pristine cognition of sameness, 
which is the n.ztural purity of the aggregate of feeling, yellow and 
d.zzzling, adorned by greater and lesser seminal points fof light], 
rudi,mt, dc.zr and zmhe.zrable to the eyes, fwi/1 emanate} from the 
hc.zrt of R,ztn,zs,mzbh.wa and his consort and will shine piercingly 
be{ore you at the /cue/ of your heart [with such brilliance} thut your 
eyes cannot bear it. Together with the light o{ pristine cognition, a 
dull blue light, findicatiue off the human realm, will also d,zzun 
before you and touch your heart. At that time, under the sway of 
pride, you will {wish tof turn auhl)' in {cur and terror from the 
bright yellow light and you will come to delight in the dull blue 
light of the lmm,m realm and feel attachment towards it. At that 
moment, abandon your fear of the yellow light, and recognise it 
as pristine cognition, yellow and dazzling, radiant and clear! Let 
your ,zwareness relax and abide directly u:ithin it, in a state of 
rzon-actiL·ity. -t~> Again and again, h,we confidence in it! Be drawn 
to it with longing deuotion! If you recognise it as the nat;tr,zl 
luminosity o( your own muareness, even though you may (eel no 
dcl'otion towards it ... md haL'e not recited the aspiratimzal prayer, 
,111 the lmddh,z-bodies .znd light rays will dissolve inseparably into 
you ,md you ll'ill •lttailllmddh,zhood. If you are un.zble to recognise TilE GREAT LIBERATIO:-o; BY HEARING 
this /radiance} as being the natural luminosity of your own aware­
ness, then pray with deuotion, thinking: 'This is the light ray of 
the transcendent lord Ratnas,mzblhzva 's compassion. I take refuge 
in it.' This, in reality, is the transcendent lord Ratnasambhava 
carne to escort you on the fearsome d~-mgerous pathway of the 
intermediate state. This is the light-ray hook of Ratnasambhava 's 
compassion! Be devoted to it! Do not delight in the dull blue light 
of the human realm. This [dull light/ is the inviting path created 
by your own habitual tendencies for deep-seated pride, which you 
yourself have generated. If you become attached to it, you will 
tumble down into the human realm, you will experience the suffer­
ings of birth, old age, sickness and death, and there will be no 
[immediate/ opportunity to escape from the swamp of cyclic exist­
ence. This [dull light/ is an obstacle blocking the path to liberation! 
Do not look at it! Abandon pride! Abandon your habitual tenden­
cies! Do not be attached to the dull blue light! Do not cling to it! 
Be devoted to the yellow light, golden and dazzling. Focus intently 
and single-minded/yon the transcendent lord Ratnasamblwva and 
recite the following aspirational prayer: 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven] by deep-seated pride, 
May the transcendent lord Ratnasambhava draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
\XIhich is the pristine cognition of sameness. 
May the supreme consort Mamaki support me from behind, 
And, thus [encircled/, may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level ol an utterly perfect buddha. 
By making this aspirational prayer with fervent devotion, you will 
dissolve into rainbow light in the heart of the transcendent lord 
Ratnasambhava, and you will attain buddhahood, as the Buddha­
body of Perfect Resource, in the southern Buddha field of the 
Glorious (Srinwt). 
There is no doubt that if I the deceased I are receptive to this intro­
duction, they will attain liberation, however weak their [indi­
vidual] ability may be. Yet, even after being given this introduction 
many times, there are some whose positive opportunities have been 
exhausted by, for example, their great negativity or through not THE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
having maintained their commitments and so forth, who, even 
now, will not have accepted this introduction. These individuals 
will have turned away in fear of both the sounds and the lumin­
osities and become agitated by desire and negative obscuration. So 
it is that, on the fourth day, the transcendent lord Amitabha's 
assembly of deities will come to escort them and, at that same 
time, the light path [indicative of the realm] of the anguished 
spirits, which is generated by desire and miserliness, will emerge. 
Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should be 
given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. On the 
fourth day, the purity of the element fire will arise in the form of 
a red lixht. At that time, from the red western Buddha field of the 
Blissful (Sukhavati), the transcendent lord Amitiibha will dawn 
before you, his body red in colour, holding in his [right] hand a 
lotus flower, seated on a peacock throne and embraced by the 
suprenze consort Pa1_ujaravasini. They are encircled by two male 
bodhisattvas, Au,llokite5vara and Mmzjusri, and two female bodhi­
sattvas, Gftii and Alokii, thus, six buddha-bodies will be shining 
before you from within a space of rainbow light. 
A red light [indicatiue o(J the pristine cognition of discernment, 
which is the natural purity of the aggregate of perceptions, red and 
dazzling, adorned by greater and lesser seminal points, radiant 
and clear, bright and dazzling, [will emanate/ from the heart of 
Amitabha and his consort and will shine piercingly before you at 
the leuel of your heart [with such brilliance/ that your eyes cannot 
bear it. Do not be afraid! Together with the light of pristine 
cognition, a dull yellow light, [indicative of the realm/ of anguished 
spirits, will also dawn before you {and touch your heart]. Do not 
delight fin the dull yellow light}! Do not become attached to it and 
do not cling to it! At this time, under the sway of deep desire, you 
will [wish to} turn away in terror from the bright red light and you 
will come to delight in the dull yellow light of the anguished spirits 
and feel attachnze11t towards it. At this moment, abandon your 
fear, and recognise the red light, bright and dazzling, radiant ;t1nd 
dear, to be pristine cognition. Let your awareness relax and abide 
directly within it, resting in a state of non-activity. Have confidence 
i11 the radiant, red luminosity! Be drawn to it with longing 
deuotion. If you recogn~se this radiance as the natural luminosity TilE GREAT LIBER:\TIO!' BY HEARING 243 
of your ozun awareness, even though you may feel no devotion 
tow,zrds it and have not recited the aspirational prayer, all the 
buddha-bodies and light rays will dissolve inseparably [into you] 
and you will attain buddhahood. If you are not able to recognise 
[the radiance/ in this way, then pray with devotion, thinking: 'This 
is the light ray of the transcendent lord Amitabha 's compassion. I 
take refuge in it.' This truly is the light-ray hook of the transcendent 
lord Amitabha's compassion! Be devoted to it! Do not turn away! 
Should you turn away, the luminosity will accompany you insepar­
ably. Do not be afr~.zid! Do not be attached to the dull yellow light 
of the anguished spirits! This is the inviting path created by your 
own habitual tendencies for deep-seated desire, which you yourself 
have generated. If you become attached to this [dull light/, you 
will fall down into the realm of the anguished spirits and you will 
experience unbearable sufferings of hunger and thirst. This [dull 
light/ is an obstacle blocking the path to liberation! Do not be 
attached to it! Abandon your attachment! Do not cling to it! Be 
devoted to the red light, which is radiant and dazzling, and focus 
intently and single-mindedly on the transcendent lord Amitabha 
and his consort, and recite the following aspirational prayer: 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence {driven/ by deep-seated desire, 
May the transcendent lord Amitd.bha draw me forward, 
Leading me 011 the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of discernment. 
May the supreme consort Pa1.ujaravasini support me from 
behind, 
And, thus [encircled/, rnay I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 
By making this aspirational prayer with fervent devotion, you will 
dissolue into rainbow light in the heart of the transcendent lord 
Amitabha and his consort, and you will attain buddhahood, as the 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, in the western Buddha field of 
the Blissful (Sukhavati). 
Although it is impossible not to be liberated by [the successful 
recognition of] this [introduction], there are nonetheless those who 
will be unable to give up their propensities due to habituation over 244 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
long periods of time, even after receiving such an introduction. 
Under the sway of envy and negative past actions, they will become 
fearful and overawed by the sounds and luminosities. Failing to be 
caught by the light-ray hook of compassion, they roam downwards 
into the fifth day. So it is that, on the fifth day, the transcendent 
lord Amoghasiddhi's assembly of deities, resplendent with the light 
rays of compassion, will come to escort them and, at the same 
time, the light path indicative of [the realm of] the antigods, which 
is generated by the dissonant mental state of envy, will emerge 
invitingly. 
Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should 
now be given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. On the 
fifth day, the purity of the entire wind element will arise in the 
form of a green light. At that time, from the green northern Buddha 
field [called] Matrix of Enlightened Activities (Karmaprasiddhi), 
the transcendent lord Buddha Amoghasiddhi with his retinue will 
dawn before you, his body green in colour, holding in his fright/ 
hand a crossed-vajra, seated on a cfvm!zcfvaka bird throne and 
embraced by the supreme consort Samayatara. These two are 
encircled by two male bodhisattvas, Vajrapar;i and Nivarar;avi~­
khambhin, and two female bodhisattvas, Gandha and Nartf. Thus, 
six buddha-bodies will be shining [before you] from within a space 
of rainbow light. 
'A green light [indicative ofi the pristine cognition of accomplish­
ment, which is the natural purity of the aggregate of motivational 
tendencies, green and dazzling, radiant and clear, bright and awe­
some, adorned by gre,lter and lesser seminal points, [will emanate/ 
from the heart of Amoghasiddhi and his consort and it will shine 
piercingly before you at the level of your heart, {with such brilli­
ance] that your eyes cannot bear it. Do not be afraid! This is the 
natural expressive power of your own awareness! Rest in a state 
of great equanimity, transcending activity, free from {the dichot­
omies ofi attachment and aversion, based on {your feelings ofi 
nearness and distance. Together with the light of pristine cognition, 
a dull red light, [indicative of the realm] of the antigods and 
formed by envy, will also dawn before you {and touch your heart]. 
Cultiuate an equanimity toward this [dull light] which is free from 
uttaclmzent or auersion! Even if your mental capacity is diminished, T II E G R E :\ T L I ~ 1: IL\ T I 0 :>; B Y II E :\ R I :>; G 
at least do not delight in it. At this time, under the sway of deep 
envy, you will [wish to/ turn aw.zy in terror from the bright and 
dazzling green luminosity and you will come to feel delight and 
attachment towards the dull red light of the antigods. At this 
moment, abandon your fear, and recognise the green luminosity, 
bright and dazzling, radiant and clear, to be pristine cognition. Let 
your awareness relax and abide directly within it, resting in a state 
of non-activity. Pray with devotion, thinking: 'This is the light ray 
o{the transcendent lord Amoghasiddhi's compassion. I take refuge 
in it.' This, in reality, is the light-ray hook of the transcendent 
lord Amoghasiddhi's compassion, which is known as the pristine 
cognition of accomplishment. Be devoted to it! Do not turn away! 
Even if you do turn away, the luminosity will accompany you 
inseparably. So, do not be afraid! Do not be att,Jched to the dull 
red light of the antigods. This is the inviting path of your past 
actions, which you yourself have engaged in, whilst motiuated by 
deep envy. If you become attached to this dull light, you will fall 
i11to the re.zlms of the antigods and experience the unbearable 
sut/erings of [unrelenting/ conflict .. md quarrelling. This [dull light/ 
is an obst.zcle blocking the path to liberation! Do not be attached 
to it! Give up your yearning! Do not cling to it! Be devoted to the 
green light, which is radiant and dazzling, and focus intently and 
single-mindedly on the transcendent lord Amoghasiddhi and his 
consort, and recite the following aspiratio11Lzl prayer: 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven} by deep-seated envy, 
May the transcendent lord Amoghasiddhi dratu me forw,lrd, 
Leading rne on the path of radiant light, 
W'hich is the pristine cognition o{ accomplishment. 
M.zy the supreme consort Samayatard support me from 
behind, 
And, thus [encircled/, may I be rescued 
. From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
_ And be escorted to the leuel of an utterly per{ect buddha. 
By making this aspirational prayer with fervent devotion, you will 
dissolve into rainbow light in the heart of the transcendent lord 
Arnoghasiddhi and his consort, and you will attain buddhaiJOod, 
as the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, in the northern Buddha 
field {called} 'lv1atrix of Enlightened Activities' (Karnwprasiddhi). TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
By giving this introduction repeatedly in this way, however weak 
the [positive] residue of [a deceased individual's] past actions might 
be, he or she will [have the opportunity to 1 attain recognition at 
one point or another. As recognition occurs at any point, it will be 
impossible for liberation not to be achieved. 
However, owing to a long association with myriad habitual 
tendencies and an unfamiliarity with pure vision and pristine cog­
nition, even after being introduced repeatedly in this way, there are 
some who are nevertheless led backwards by negative propensities, 
despite this setting face to face having been given. Failing to be 
gripped by the light-ray hook of compassion, they will he overcome 
by awe and terror r upon the arising] of the lights and rays, and 
continue to wander downwards. 
Thereupon, on the sixth day, the male and female deities of the 
five enlightened families, together with their retinues, will arise 
simultaneously, and at that very moment, the six [dull] lights, 
[indicative] of the six classes of living beings, will also arise simul­
taneously. 
Therefore, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should 
be given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. Until yes­
terday the uisions of the five individual enliKhtened families arose 
before you. Despite this, even though the [former/ introduction 
was giuen, you experienced awe and terror; a response generated 
by your habit1wl tendencies. Consequently, you have remained 
in your present state, until now. If you had preuiously recog­
nised {one off the natura/luminosities of the pristine cognitions of 
the fiue enlightened families as being a natural nzanifestation [of 
actual reality}, you would haue dissolued into rainbow light fat 
the heart/ of {one of/ these buddha-bodies of the fiue respectiue 
enlightened families, and attained buddhahood, in the Buddh.z­
body of Perfect Resource. Yet, since you haue been un.zble to 
recognise these {experiences} as being natural manifestations, you 
haue wandered here. Therefore, listen now, without distraction. 
The uision of the entire /peaceful assembly/ of the fiue enlightened 
families, together with that which is called: 'the uision of the 
four pristine cognitions combined',47 will now come to inuite you. 
Recognise this! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, fat this time} the four coloured T II E c; R LA T L l U l-. R :\ T I 0 :\ B Y H E A R l :-.; G 2.p 
lights, which are the pure {orms of the four clements, will d,zwn 
be{ore you; and, simultaneously, the buddha Vairocana and his 
consort will arise, as before, from the central Buddha field of the 
Pen•asive Seminal Point [i.e. Ak~mi~(ha-Ghanavyaha]. [At that 
same moment}, the buddha Vajrasattua and his consort, sur­
rounded by their retinue, will arise from the e.zstern Buddha field 
of M.mifest joy (Ahhirati). The buddha Ratnasambhaua and his 
consort, together with their retinue, will arise {rom the southern 
Buddha field of the Glorious (Srlmat). The buddha Amitahha and 
his consort, together with their retinue, will arise from the western 
Buddha field of the Blissful (Sukhdvatl), and the buddha Amogha­
siddhi and his consort, together with their retinue, will now arise 
before you from the northern Buddha field [called} A1atrix of 
Enlightened Actiuities {i.e. Karmaprasiddhi}, fall arising together} 
out of a space o{ rainbow light. 
0, Child of Buddha N.zture, encircling these male and female 
deities of the fiue enlightened families, the male gatekeepers, 
[Trailokyajuijaya, Y,mr.1ntaka, Hayagrluaraja and Amrtaku~u:ja­
lin, will also arise, together with the {enzale gatekeepers, A1ikusa, 
Pds.:z, Spho(d and Ghm.z{J. In addition, the six {emanational} sages 
who are transcendent lords, will also appear before you: Indra­
sakra who is the sage of the gods, Vemacitra who is the sage of 
the antigods, S/ikyamuni who is the sage of humans, Sthirasi1?zha 
who is the sage of the animals, judlamukha who is the sage of the 
anguished spirits, and Dharmardja tl/ho is the s,zge o{ the hell 
beings. f Accomp,mying the aboue array], Samantabhadra and 
Sanzmztabhadri will also arise be{ore you, fin the form called] 
Samantabhadra ,md Consort in Union, [the co,lfescencef which is 
the progenitor o{ all the budd has. 
These, the forty-two assembled deities of the Buddha-body of 
Perfect Resource, will emanate from within your heart and then 
appe,zr before you. Recognise them! For they have arisen from 
within your own pure vision! 0, Child of Buddha Nature, these 
buddha fields do not exist extraneously. They are the fiue aspects 
o{ your own he,zrt; its four directions and centre. Emanating 
now from within your own heart, they have arisen before you. 
These buddha-bodies have not arisen extraneously. They have 
spontaneously arisen, atemporally, from the natural expressiue 
power of your own aw,zreness. Therefore recognise them as they 
are! THE TIBETA~ BOOK OF THE DEAD 
0, Child o{ Buddha Nature, these buddha-bodies /that you see 
before you/ ,Jre neither l,zrge nor small, but perfectly proportioned, 
and they ure full udonzedjzl'ith their respective ornaments, /cos­
tumes/. colours. postures, thrones and hund-gestures. The array is 
mudc up of fcentr .. zlj couples fa( male and (em.de deities/, forming 
five distinct dusters. and eut-h cluster of fiue is encircled by an 
aura o( fiue-coloured lights. All the nz.zle bodhis,zttuas of the ffiuej 
enlightened /~mzilics who accomfhmy the m,zle flmddhasj, all the 
{enhzle bodhis,ztll'•lS of the [fiuej enlightened f~mzilies who aaom­
pmzy the {emale [ lmddhasj, and the entire nzal.u.fal,z will arise 
[he{ore youj, per(ectly and simultaneously. So recognise them! 
They are your own meditatio1wl deities! 
0, Child of Buddlhl Nature, (rom the he.zrts o{ the male and 
{em,de bzuidh,zs o{ the five enlightened f~unilies, the light r,zys of 
the '{our pristine cognitions combined', uery fine and clear, like a 
spider's web, will d,Jwn before your heart, [like the/ entwined light 
rays o( the sun. 
First, a sheet o( radiant white4s light rays, bright ,md awesome, 
f indic..ztiue o/J the pristine cognition of reality's expanse, will ema­
nLite from the he,zrt o{ V~.Iiroc,ma, and touch your hc.zrt. Ahoue4
" 
this sheet o{light. a U'hite semin,d point resembling u mirror facing 
doll'nw,zrds zuill arise, emanating light rays, extremely radiant, 
bright ,md d~.z:::::.ling, .zdonzed with fiue distinct semin~.zl points 
o{like lhlllire, each of which in turn will be adorned by greater 
a1zd lesser semm,d points, f{orming an .zrr.zyj with no centre or 
hori:::.cm. 
[Second/. a sheet o{ r.zdiant blue light, findic,ztiue olf the mirror­
like pristine cogniticm, {zl'ili emanate/ {rom the heart of Vajra­
s,zttL'•l. Ahoue this, lzke a turquoise bowl facing doll'llll'ards, a 
radiant blue seminal point will arise, falsoj adorned by fan .zrray 
off greater and lesser semin,zl points. 
{Third/. u sheet of r,zdi~.mt ycllou./ light./ indit-.ztiue ofl the pristine 
cognition o{ sameness, fzl'ill enhmutej (rom the heart o( R,anas­
.mzhhal'a. Ahoue this, like a gold cup facing downwards, a radi.mt 
yellow semin,zl point will ,1rise, {also] ,zdomed by fan urruy otf 
gre,lfer .md lesser seminal points. 
f Fourth/ ... z sheet o( r,zdimzt red light, [ indicatiue o/J the pristine 
cognition o{ disanzment, /ll'ill emanate/ from the heart o( Ami­
uhh.z. Aboue this, like a coral bowl facing downwards, a radi~mt 
red scmin,zl point ll'i/1 arise, extremely luminous and dazzling, TilE GREAT LIBERATIO:-.: BY HEARING 
[resplendent} with the luminosity of pristine cognition. It too will 
be adorned with five distinct seminal points of like nature, each of 
which in turn will also be adorned by greater and lesser seminal 
points, [forming an array] with no centre or horizon. All of these 
flights and seminal points} will indeed arise, and touch your heart. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, these [radiances] are arising out of 
the natural expressive power of your own awareness. They have 
not come from anywhere else. Therefore, do not be attached to 
them! Do not be afraid of them! Relax and rest in a non-conceptual 
state. 5° [Abiding] in this state, all the buddha-bodies and light rays 
will merge into you, and buddhahood will then be attained. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, [during the above series] the green 
light [indicative} of the pristine cognition of accomplishment will 
not arise. The reason for this is th.:.1t the natural expressive power 
of pristine cognition, which is your own intrinsic awareness, is not 
yet perfected. 51 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, this [array of luminosities that you 
are now experiencing/ is called: 'the vision of the four pristine 
cognitions combined'. It is fa/so} known as the 'hollow passageway 
of Vajrasattva '.52 At this time, therefore, )'OU should recall the oral 
instructions, which your spiritual teacher formerly introduced to 
you. If you [successfully] recall this [former] introduction, you will 
have confidence in the visions that have already arisen, and you 
will recognise them, just as there is instant recognition at the 
meeting of a mother and her son, or just as one instantly recognises 
an old acquaintance the moment one sees them. Cutting through 
any doubt, you will recognise [these radiances] to be natural mani­
festations /of actual reality}. Achieving confidence, in this way, in 
the unchanging path of pure reality, and sustaining a continuous 
meditative stability, '3 you will dissolve into the buddha-body of 
great spontaneously present awareness54 and irreuersibly attain 
buddhahood in the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, together with the radiances of 
pr_istine cognition, the six [dull flights [indicative] of the six classes 
[of beings} who are obscured by impure and bewildering percep­
tion, will also arise simultaneously. That is to say, the dull white 
light of the gods, the dull red light of the antigods, the dull blue 
light of the humans, the dull green light of the animals, the dull 
yellow light of the anguished spirits, and the dull smoky light of 
the inhabitants of the hells will arise alongside the radiances of THE TIBl-.TAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
pure pnstme COKnztwn. At that moment, do not seize upon, or 
become attached to, any [of these lights/! Relax and abide in a 
non-referential state. For if you are fearful of the pure radiances 
of pristine cognition and become attached to the impure lights of 
cyclic existence with its six classes [of beings/, you will assume a 
body amongst [one of/ these six realms, and you will be dehilit.Jted; 
for there will be no [immediate/ opportunity for escape from cyclic 
existence, this vast ocean of suffering. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if you are one who has ;wt been 
introduced to the oral instructions of a spirittwl teacher, you will 
be frightened and overwhelmed by these buddha-bodies and the 
radiances of pure pristine cognition, iust described, and you U'ill 
feel attachment towards the fdulljlights of impure cyclic existence. 
Do not do this! Be devoted to the bright and dazzling radiances of 
pure pristine cognition. Be full of devotion and think: 'The light 
rays of pristine cognition, which are the compassion of Those Gone 
to Bliss, the transcendent lords of the five enlightened {ami lies, have 
come to seize me with compassion. I take refuge in them.' Do not 
be attached to the bewildering lights of the six classes [of beings/. 
Do not cling to them! Focus one-pointedly on the male and fem,zle 
buddhas of the fiue enlightened families and recite the following 
aspirational prayer: 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven} by the five virulent 
poisons, 
May the transcendent conquerors, /the mule lmddhus/ o( the 
five enlightened families, draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the four pristine cognitions combined. 
May the five supreme female buddhas, [the purity off the 
expanse, support me from behind, 
And, thus [encircled/, may I be rescued 
From the light paths of the six impure cl,zsses [of beings/! 
Released frorn the fearsome passageway of the intermediute st.Jte, 
May I be escorted to the five utterly supreme and pure buddha 
fields. 
By making this aspirational prayer, [the superior adept] will recog­
nise [the radiances of pristine cognition] to be natural manifes­
tations [of actual reality] and thereby, upon dissolving indivisibly Till:. CRLAT I.IP.[R:\TI0:-.1 HY HEAIU!SC 
with them, buddhahood will be attained. Those of average ability 
will achieve recognition on the basis of fervent devotion and 
thereby attain liberation, and even all[those of inferior ability] can, 
through the power of pure aspiration, close the womb entrances 
through which the six classes [of beings are born]. Thus, if the 
nature of 'the four pristine cognitions combined' is realised, [all of 
the above individuals] can attain buddhahood through 'the hollow 
passageway of Vajrasattva'. As a result of being introduced in such 
a clear and detailed way, the majority will attain recognition and 
many [individuals] will achieve liberation. 
However, those most lowly individuals in the human world who 
totally lack the propensities for spiritual practice, and those who 
have broken their commitments and so forth, will continue to be 
bewildered, as a result of their [negative] past actions. Despite 
being introduced, they will continue to roam downwards, failing 
to achieve recognition. 
So it is, that on the seventh day, the divine assembly of the 
Awareness Holders will arise from the pure realm of the sky-farers 
and come to escort [the deceased], as will, simultaneously, the light 
path to the animal realm, formed of the dissonant mental state, 
delusion.'5 
At this time, calling the deceased by name, the introduction 
should be given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. On the 
seventh day, a fiue-facetcd multicoloured light, [which is indicative 
of] the purity of your habitual tendencies in the expanse [of reality}, 
will arise before you. Simultaneously, the divine assembly of the 
awareness holders, arising from the pure realm of the sky-farers, 
will come forward to escort you. 
In the centre of [this ma1Jcf.alaj, suffitsed by rainbows and light, 
the unsurpassed {Vidyadharaj known as the 'awareness holder of 
maturation', Padmanartesuara, will instantaneously arise, his body 
resplendent with the radiance of the five lights, embraced by his 
consort, a red cj.akinf, {who is dancing} with a blood-filled skull 
and a curved knife, raised in the gesture of pointing to the sky. 
From the east of the ma1Jcf.ala, [the Vidyadhara/ known as the 
'atl/areness holder who a hides on the levels' will inst,mtaneously 
arise, his body white in colour, his face radiant ,znd smiling. He is 
embraced by his consort, a white cj.dkinf, who is dancing with a THE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
blood-filled skull and a curued knife, raised in the gesture o{ 
pointing to the sky. 
From the south of the m,u.zcjula, {the Vidyadlhzraj known tlS the 
'awtlreness holder with power over the lifespan' ll!ill inst.zn­
taneously arise, his body yellow in colour and adorned by the 
exquisite {eighty/ minor marks. He is embraced by his consort, a 
yellow cfakini, who is d,mcing with a blood-filled skull and .z curz•ed 
kni{e, raised in the gesture of pointing to the sky. 
From the west of the mm.zcfala, {the Vidyadharaj knou.m as the 
'awareness holder of the great seal' will instantaneously arise, his 
body red in colour, his face radiant and smiling. He is embraced 
by his consort, a red cjdkini, who is dancing with a blood-filled 
skull and a curued knife, r.zised in the gesture of pointing to the 
sky. 
From the north of the mu~zcjLZI,z, {the Vidyadhar,zj known tlS the 
'awareness holder of spontaneous presence' will instantaneously 
arise, his body green in colour, his face both wrath fit! and smiling. 
He is embraced by his consort, a green cfakini, who is dancing with 
a blood-filled skull and a cun•ed knife, r,zised in the gesture of 
pointing to the sky. 
Encircling these aw,zreness holders, there will be inestim.zhle 
crou·ds of cfakinis: the cfakinis o{ the eight charnel grounds, cfakinis 
of the four enlightened families, cfakinis of the three abodes, cj.Zkinis 
of the ten directions, c.fakinis of the twenty-four power-places, 
spiritual heroes and heroines, faithful retainers, 'h and protectors 
of the [sacred] teachings- all wearing the six kinds of bone orna­
ments, playing drums, thigh-bone trumpets, skull drums and fw,zu­
ing/ banners made of the hide of ritz.wlly 'liberated' beings, ctlnopies 
and streamers o{ human hide, [the entire display pervaded by} an 
incense cloud o{ burning human flesh, reuerberating U/ith the sound 
of countless and dil'erse musical instruments, the sound permeating 
LZII world systems, ctlusing them to vibrate, tremble and quuke. 
The crescendo will reverberate as if to split your he,zd. Performing 
their diuerse dances, this {array/ will come to escort those who 
haue kept their commitments and to bring to account those who 
have allowed their commitments to degenertlte. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, a five-coloured light, which is 
findicatil'e off the purity of your htlbitual tendencies in the expanse 
{of reulityj and of coemergent pristine cognition, composed of THE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING 253 
coloured threads [of light] twisted together, pulsing, shimmering, 
translucent, radiant, clear, bright and awesome, {will emanate} 
from the hearts of the five principal awareness holders and will 
shine piercingly before you, at the level of your heart [with such 
brilliance/ that your eyes cannot bear it. At that monzent, a dull 
green light, [indicative on the realms of the animals, will arise 
simultaneously with the light of pristine cognition /and touch your 
heart}. At this time, bewildered and confused by your past habitual 
tendencies, you will be frightened by the five-coloured light, and 
wish to turn away. Instantly, you will be attracted to the dull light 
of the animal realms, so therefore, do not be frightened now by 
the bright and flashing five-coloured light! Do not be terrified! 
Recognise this [radiance} to be pristine cognition! \'</ithin the [five­
coloured/ light, all the natural sounds of the sacred teachings will 
resound like a thousand simultaneous peals of thunder. They will 
resound like a [violent} echo, an overwhelming reverberation, a 
tumultuous crescendo, a cacophony of war cries, and /pound with 
the roar on wrathfitl mantras of terrifying ferocity. Do not be 
afraid! Do not tum away! Recognise these sounds and luminosities 
to be the naturally expressive power of your own au:areness, mani­
festing naturally. Do not be attracted to the dull green light of the 
animals. Do not cling to it! If you become attached to it, you will 
fall into the obscured realms of the aninZLlis und be enveloped by 
the limitless sufferings of obfuscation, dumbness and servility, 
from which there will be no /immediate] opportunity for release. 
So do not be attached to that {dull green light}! Be devoted to the 
five-coloured light that is radiant and dazzling! Focus intently and 
one-pointedly on the diuine assembly of the awareness holders, the 
transcendent lords and spiritual teachers, thinking: 'As you, the 
Awareness Holders together with your [attending} heroes and cjak­
inis have come forward to escort me to the pure realm of the 
sky-farers, I implore you, pity sentient beings such as myself who 
have failed to amass the accumulations {of merit and pristine 
-.:ognitionj, and pity those such as I, who have not been rescued 
until now, even though we have been embraced by the compassion 
of all the assembled deities of the five enlightened families, Those 
Gone to Bliss, throughout the three times! Today may you, the 
divine assembly of awareness holders, not allow nze to descend 
any further than this. Grasp me with the hook of your compassion, 254 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
and lead me immediately to the pure realm of the sky-farers.' 
Focusing intently and one-pointedly on the divine fmm_u:jala off 
awareness holders, recite the fol/Otoing aspirational prayer: 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven] by deep-seated 
habitual tendencies, 
May the divine assembly of awareness holders attend to me 
And lead me on the path, with great love. 
May the assembly of spiritual heroes and awareness holders 
draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is {the luminance off coemergent pristine cognition. 
May the supreme consorts, the hosts of cjakinis, support me 
from behind, 
And, thus fencircledj, may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the {sacred/ pure realm of the sky-farers. 
By making this aspirational prayer with fervent devotion, you will 
dissolue into rainbow light, in the heart of the divine assembly of 
the awareness holders, and thereafter, undoubtedly, be born into 
the pure-realm of the sky-farers. 
All types of spiritual friend can attain recognition at this stage, and 
[thus I they will attain liberation. There is no doubt that even those 
with negative propensities can attain liberation at this point. 
This concludes the first part of the Great Liberation by Hearing, 
the introduction to inner radiance in the intermediate state of the 
time of death and the introduction to the peaceful deities of the 
intermediate state of reality. 
ITI! SAMAYA! rgya rgya rgya! PART TWO 
An Elucidation of the Appearance of the Wrathful Deities 
in the Intermediate State of Reality 
Herein is contained An Elucidation of the Arising of the Intermedi­
ate State of the W1rathful Deities.1 
INTRODUCTION 
Now, the way in which the intermediate state of the wrathful 
deities arises should be presented. In the previous intermediate 
state of the peaceful deities there were seven successive [critical or] 
dangerous pathways. By receiving introduction to these sequen­
tially, even though one might not have attained recognition at 
one [critical pathway], one should have attained recognition at 
another. Those who have achieved liberation [in this way] are 
countless. 
Yet, although many have been liberated through such [introduc­
tions to the nature of reality], sentient beings are numerous. Evil 
past actions arc very potent. Negative obscurations are dense. 
Habitual tendencies are long lasting. The cycle of ignorance and 
bewilderment is inexhaustible and undiminishing. Despite having 
received introduction in such detail, there arc still a large number 
who roam downwards, not having achieved liberation. 
Now, after the invitation of the assembly of the peaceful deities, 
and the divine assembly of the awareness holders and 9akinis, has 
passed, the blazing assembly of the fifty-eight wrathful blood­
drinking deities, who are a natural transformation of the above 
assembly of peaceful deities, will arise. These deities will be very 
dissimilar [in appearance] to the peaceful deities. This is the inter­
mediate state of the wrathful deities and, [consequently, as the 
deceased will be] overpowered by fear, terror or awe, recog­
nition also becomes more difficult. Uncontrollably, the awareness Tlll: TIBETA~ BOOK OF THE 01:-.AD 
continuously faints. But, nevertheless, if there is even the slightest 
recognition, liberation is easy. Should you ask why this is so-it is 
because once the awesome, terrifying and fearful appearances 
arise, the awareness does not have the luxury of distraction. The 
awareness is one-pointedly concentrated. 
If, at this stage, oral instructions such as those which follow 
[have not been previously introduced, or] are not now introduced, 
even though one's studies may have been ocean-like, they will be 
of no benefit here. Even the preceptors [of monasteries] who 
uphold the monastic disciplines and great teachers of dialectics 
[who have not been previously introduced] will be bewildered on 
this occasion, and fail to attain recognition. Consequently, they 
will continue to roam in cyclic existence. This is even more so for 
ordinary persons: fleeing in awe, terror and fear, they will fall into 
the abyss of lower existences and suffer miserably. However, even 
the most inferior of yogins who has practised the way of secret 
mantra, will immediately, upon seeing the assembled blood­
drinking deities, recognise them to be meditational deities, as if 
meeting old acquaintances. Trusting in them, the yogin will dis­
solve indivisibly [into the meditational deities] and attain 
buddha hood. 
The crucial point is indeed that those in this world who have, 
[prior to deathj, meditated on the formal description of these 
blood-drinking buddha-bodies, and also made offerings and 
praises to them, or, at the very least, have simply seen their painted 
and sculpted images, may recognise the forms that arise here and 
attain liberation. 
Moreover, when those preceptors who uphold the monastic 
disciplines and the teachers of dialectics [who have not been intro­
duced! die, however great their perseverance was in religious con­
duct or however learned they were in their exegetical doctrines 
within the human world, no [auspicious] signs, such as major or 
minor bone relics or rainbow light, will appear. 2 Since they did not 
take the way of secret mantra to heart while they were alive, 
but instead depreciated the secret mantra, and failed to become 
acquainted [in life] with the assembled deities of the way of secret 
mantra, they will not recognise the [luminosities and deities] when 
they arise in the intermediate state. Suddenly seeing something 
they had not previously seen, they will develop an attitude of 
aversion and become hostile. Consequently they will proceed into TilE GREAT Lll.ILR:\TIO:-; BY lll:ARI:-1/G 257 
lower existences. This [lack of familiarity and the arousal of aver­
sion] is the reason why !auspicious] signs, such as major or minor 
bone relics, and rainbow light, do not occur in the case of those 
upholders of monastic discipline and dialectical philosophers, 
hmvever excellent they may have been, who have not taken to 
heart and experientially cultivated the way of secret mantra. 
On the other hand, practitioners of the way of secret mantra, 
even if they are the lowest of the low, however coarsely [they 
behaved I in the world, or however unrefined and uncultured they 
were, and however unseemly and inelegant their conduct, even if 
they have not been able to experientially cultivate the way of secret 
mantra successfully, will attain liberation in this instance, simply 
because they have not embraced a mistaken view, and are without 
doubt, and are devoted to the secret mantra. Even if such an 
individual's conduct in the human world was inelegant, at least 
one !auspicious] indication, such as major and minor relics, images 
or rainbow light, will occur at the moment of death. This is because 
the way of secret mantra carries an extremely great blessing. 
Yogins of the way of secret mantra who are above average 
capacity, who have experientially cultivated the meditations of 
both the generation and perfection stages and [practised] the reci­
tation of the heart-mantras, and so on, do not need to roam 
downwards this far into the intermediate state of reality. As soon 
as respiration ceases, they will certainly be invited to the pure realm 
of the sky-farcrs by the awareness holders, heroes and <;iakinis. As 
an indication of this, [one or more of] the following signs will 
occur: the sky will become cloudless; [the body] will merge into 
rainbows and lights; a shower of flowers will fall; there will be the 
fragrance of perfume lin the air] and the sound of music in the 
sky; while rays of light, major and minor relics, images, rainbow 
lights, and so forth will appear [in the funeral pyre ] . .1 
So it is that, for the upholders of the monastic disciplines and 
teachers [of dialectics who have not been previously introduced], 
atld for practitioners of the way of secret mantra whose commit­
ments have degenerated, and for all ordinary persons, this Great 
Liberation by Hearing is indispensable. 
Those serious meditators who have meditated on [the practices 
on the Great Perfection and the Great Seal will recognise the inner 
radiance that dawns during the intermediate state of the time 
of death and will attain the Buddha-body of Reality. For these THE TIIH.TAN BOOK Or THE DEAD 
meditators there is absolutely no need to read this Liberation by 
Hearing. 
[In summary], if individuals recognise the inner radiance during 
the intermediate state of the time of death, they will attain the 
Buddha-body of Reality. If they achieve recognition during this 
intermediate state of reality, when the visions of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities arise, they will attain the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource. If they achieve recognition during the intermediate state 
of rebirth, they will attain the Buddha-body of Emanation. Alterna­
tively, at the very least, [individuals who have heard this teaching] 
will be born into the higher existences, where, based on the residual 
potency of their past actions, they wiU again meet with, and be 
able to practise, this [sacred] teaching in the next life. 
Since [this sacred teaching is based on recognition in the inter­
mediate states] this Great Liberation by Hearing is the teaching 
whereby buddhahood can be attained without meditation. It is the 
teaching whereby liberation can be attained just by its being heard, 
it is the teaching whereby those that are the most negative arc led 
onto the secret path,4 it is the teaching whereby essential points 
[of discrimination] are instantly grasped, and it is the profound 
teaching whereby perfect buddhahood is instantaneously attained. 
Thus, it is impossible for those sentient beings who have been 
engaged by this teaching to fall into lower existences. This [Libera­
tion by Hearing] and the [related] Liberation by ~'earing should 
be read aloud together, since [their conjunction] is like a nur)9ala 
of gold, inlaid with turquoise ornaments.' 
MAIN SUBJECT MATTER 
Having outlined in this way the essential purpose of the Liberation 
by Hearing, [the deceased] should now be introduced to the arising 
of the intermediate state of the wrathful deities. 
Again, you should call the deceased by name, three times, and 
say the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. Although 
the intermediate state of the peaceful deities did previously arise 
within you, you did not recognise it. So now you have wandered, 
/through the succession of pathways,} to here. Now, 011 the eighth TilE <.;HEAT LIBEHATION BY IIEARII'G 259 
day, the assembly of wrathful blood-drinking deities will arise. 
Recognise them and do not be distracted! 0, Child of Buddha 
Nature, he who is called Great Glorious Buddha Heruka will 
[now} arise, vividly manifesting before you from within your own 
br,zin. His body, b/a;:ing in a mass of light, is dark brown in colour, 
hauing three heads, six .zrms and four legs, which are [firmly] set 
apart. His right face is white, the left red and the central face dark 
brown. His nine eyes are fixed in a fearsome wrathful gaze, his 
eyebrows are quiuering like lightning, his fangs are bared and 
gleaming, and he is laughing loudly, uttering the sounds of Ala/a 
and Haha, and Shoo oo -like whistles, in loud piercing cries. The 
go/den-auburn hair of his head blazes and rears upward, sun and 
moon-discs, black serpents and dry skulls adorn each of his heads, 
and black snakes and fresh skulls form a garland around his body. 
In his six hands he holds, on the right in the first hand, a wheel, 
in the middle one, an axe and in the last hand a sword and to the 
left, in his first hand, he holds a bell, in the middle one, a plough­
share and in the hzst a skull. The female consort Buddhakrodhes­
vari is embracing his body, her right hand clasped around his neck 
and her left offering a skull-cup filled with blood to his mouth. 
Amidst loud pounding palatal sounds of 'Thuk-chom ', and an 
[echoing} roar like the reuerberation of thunder, the fire of pristine 
cognition blazes from the fiery indestructible pores of their bodies, 
and thus they stand together, {with one leg} extended and /the 
other} drawn in, on a throne supported by garucjas. 
Do not be ~.1fr,Iid! Do not be terrified! And do not be awed! 
Recognise this to be the buddha-body of your own intrinsic aware­
ness. These ~.ue your own nzedit,ztional deities, so do not be terri­
fied. This, in reality, is the transcendent lord Vairocmza and his 
consort, so do not be afraid. Recognition and liberation will occur 
sinw/ taneous/y! 
If, upon hearing these words, [the deceased] recognises the medi­
t?tional deities, he or she will dissolve indivisibly [within them] 
and thereby attain buddhahood in the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource. 
Yet should [the deceased], once again, flee in awe and terror 
and thereby not attain recognition, then, on the ninth day, the 
Vajra family of blood-drinking deities will come to escort him or 
her. 260 THE TIBETA:-.1 BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should be 
given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. He who is 
called the transcendent lord Vaira Heruka, of the Vaira family of 
blood-drinking deities, will arise from the eastern direction of your 
brain and appear before you. His body is dark blue in colour, with 
three faces, six arms and four legs, {firmly} set apart. His right face 
is white, the left red and the central face is blue. In his six hands 
he holds, on the right in the first hand, a ua;ra, in the middle one, 
a skull-cup and in the last hand an axe, and to the left, in his first 
hand, he holds a bell, in the middle one,_ a skull-cup and in the last 
a ploughshare. The female consort Vairakrodhe5uari is embracing 
his body, her right hand clasped around his neck and her left 
offering a skull-cup filled with blood to his mouth. 
Do not be afraid! Do not be terrified! And do not be awed! 
Recognise this to be the buddha-body of your own awareness. 
These are your own meditational deities, so do not be terrified. 
This, in reality, is the transcendent lord VairLZsattua and his con­
sort, so do not fear them. Be devoted to them! Recognition and 
liberation will occur simultaneously! 
If, upon hearing these words, lthe deceased] recognises the medi­
tational deities, he or she will dissolve indivisibly l with them] 
and thereby attain buddhahood in the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource. 
Yet, if those individuals who are greatly obscured by past 
actions, again flee in awe and terror and thereby do not attain 
recognition, then on the tenth day, the Ratna family of blood­
drinking deities will come to escort them. 
Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should be 
given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. On the 
tenth d,zy, he who is called Rutna Heruka, of the Ratna family of 
blood-drinking deities, will arise from the southern directiolr.of 
your brain and appear before you. His body is dark yellow in 
colour, with three faces, six arms and four legs, [firmly/ set apart. 
His right face is white, the left red, and the central face is a burning 
dark yellow. In his six IJLmds he holds, on the right in the first THE GREAT LIHF.RATIO~ BY IIEARI:-.;G 261 
hand, a jewel, in the middle one, a kha{l'anga and in the last hand 
a club and to the left, in his first hand, he holds a bell, in the nzzddle 
one, a skull-cup and in the last a trident. The female consort 
Ratnakrodhesvari is embracing his body, her right hand clasped 
around his neck and l:'er left offering a skull-cup filled with blood 
to his mouth. 
Do not be afraid! Do not be terrified! And do not be awed! 
Recognise this to be the buddha-body of )'our own awareness. 
These are your own nzeditational deities, so do not be terrified. 
This, in reality, is the transcendent lord Ratnasambhava and his 
consort, so be deuoted to them! Recognition and liberation will 
occur simultaneously! 
If, upon hearing these words, [the dece<:lsed I recognises the medi­
tational deities, he or she will dissolve indivisibly [with them! 
and thereby attain buddha hood I in the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource!. 
Yet, even after receiving this introduction, there arc those who, 
owing to their negative habitual tendencies, will nevertheless flee 
in awe and terror. Not recognising their own mcditational deities, 
they will perceive them as Yama and thereby the recognition will 
not occur. So it is that, on the eleventh day, the assembled deities 
of the Padma family of blood-drinking deities will come to escort 
the deceased. 
Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction should be 
given with the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, [listen without distraction}. On the 
eleuenth day, he who is called the transcendent lord Padma 
Heruka, of the Padma family of blood-drinking deities, will arise 
from the western direction of your brain, in union with his consort, 
and appear vividly before you. His body is dark red in colour, with 
three faces, six arms and four legs, [firmly] set apart. His right face 
is white, the left blue, and the central face is dark red. In his six 
hands he holds, on the right in the first hand, a lotus, in the middle 
one, a kha{va1iga and in the last hmzd a mace and to the left, in his 
first lhmd he holds a bell, in the middle one, a blood-filled skull and 
in the last a small drum. The {emale consort Padmakrodhesvari is 
embracing his body, her right hand clasped around his neck and her 
left offering a skull-cup filled with blood to his mouth. 262 TilE TIBETA:-.; BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Do not be a{raid! Do not be terrified! And do not be awed! 
Contemplate them with joy. Recognise this to he the buddha-body 
of your own awareness. These are your own meditational deities, 
so do not be terrified. This, in reality, is the transcendent lord 
AmitJhha and his consort, so be devoted to them! Recognition 
and liberation will occur simultuneously! 
If, upon hearing these words, lthe deceased! recognises the medi­
tational deities, he or she will dissolve indivisibly !with them] 
and thereby attain buddhahood [in the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource!. 
Yet, even after receiving this introduction, there are those who 
are held back by their negative habitual tendencies and there arc 
those who will not recognise their medirational deities because 
they have fled in awe and terror. The recognition not having been 
attained, so it is that, on the twelfth day, the assembled deities of 
the Karma family of blood-drinking deities, followed hy the Gaurr, 
the Pisacr, the Female Gatekeepers, and the Isvari, will come to 
escort the deceased. Since an even greater fear and terror will arise 
if these are not recognised, again, call the deceased by name, and 
offer the introduction in the following \vords: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction. When the 
twel{th day comes, he U/ho is called the transcendent lord K,zrma 
Heruka, of the Karma family of blood-drinkinR deities, will arise 
from the northern direction of your brain, in union with his con­
sort, and appear viuidly be{ore you. His body is dark green in 
colour, with three {aces, six arms and {our legs, /firmly} set afh1rt. 
His right face is white, the left red, and the central /~lee is an 
awesome dark green. In his six hands he holds, on the right in the 
first hand, a sword, in the middle one, a klhz[u{uig.l and in the last 
hand a mace and to the left, in his first ha11d he holds a bell, in the 
middle one, a skull and in the last a plough-share. The female 
consort Karmakrodhesvari is embracing his body, her right hand 
clasped around his neck and her left of{ering a skull-cup filled with 
blood to his mouth. 
Do not be a{raid! Do not be terrified! And do 11ot be awed! 
Recognise this to he the buddha-body of your ou.m ,zzuarencss. 
These are your oum meditation.1l deities, so do not be terrified. 
This, in re,zlity, is the transce11dent lord Amoghasiddhi and his THF GREAT LlgEHATIO!'..: BY HEAHII'<G 
consort, so reg~.1rd them with intense devotion! Recognition and 
liberation will occur simultaneously! 
If, upon hearing these words, [the deceased] recognises the medi­
tational deities, he or she will dissolve indivisibly [with them] 
and thereby attain buddhahood [in the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource]. 
Based on the spiritual teacher's [former] oral instruction, as one 
recognises these [visionary appearances] as the natural expressive 
power of awareness, naturally manifesting, liberation will occur. 
This is like one who recognises a stuffed lion-skin to be a stuffed 
lion. The nature of the stuffed lion is such that if its actual nature 
is not recognised it will generate awe and terror. But, as soon as 
someone points out what this really is, the fa<;ade is penetrated, 
and the fear dissolves. Similarly, here, when the assembly of blood­
drinking deities arises, with their huge bodies and thick limbs, 
filling the whole of space, I the deceased] undoubtedly becomes 
awed and terrified. But, immediately upon hearing this introduc­
tion, the deceased will recognise the appearances to be natural 
manifestations l of actual reality], or to be their own meditational 
deities. [As this recognition occurs,] the two [aspects of inner 
radiance], the 'mother inner radiance', which was formerly [intro­
duced] through the spiritual teacher's guidance, and the 'naturally 
arising child inner radiance', [the experience of] which emerges 
subsequently [as the result of practice], meet together- in other 
words, like meeting an old friend, [the inner radiance] that dawns 
face to face with oneself docs so in a naturally liberating manner 
and one will be naturally freed within [the expanse otl naturally 
radiant intrinsic awareness. 
If this introduction is not received, even good persons may turn 
away at this point and continue to roam within cyclic existence. 
[As this occurs] then, the female wrathful deities, the eight Gauri, 
and the eight Pisaci, I the latter j having diverse I animal] heads, will 
~merge from within the brain [of the deceased], and appear before 
him or her. Again, calling the deceased by name, the introduction 
should be given in the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction! The eight 
Gauri will now be emerging from within your own brain and 
appe,lring before you. Do not be afraid! From the eastern direction THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
of your brain the white Gauri, holding a human corpse as a cudgel 
in her right hand and a blood-filled skull in her left hand, will arise 
before you. Do not be afraid! From the southern direction, the 
yellow Cauri, shooting an arrow from a bow; from the west, the 
red Pramoha, holding a crocodile victory-banner; and from the 
north, the black Vetali, holding a vajra and a blood-filled skull, 
[will arise/. From the south-east, the red-yellow Pukkasi, holding 
entrails in her right [hand/ and eating them with her left; from the 
south-west, the green-black Ghasmari, holding a blood-filled skull 
in her left [hand/, stirring this with a vajra in her right hand 
and drinking awesomely; from the north-west, the white-yellow 
Carpf.ali, tearing apart the head and bqdy [of a bloated corpse], 
holding the heart in her right hand and eating the body with her 
left; and from the north-east, the blue-black Smasani, tearing a 
head and body apart and eating, {will arise}. These eight Gauri, 
who are indicative of the [eight/ classes [of consciousness], will 
emerge from within your own brain, and surround the five blood­
drinking deities and their consorts. Do not be afraid! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen without distraction! The eight 
Pisaci, who are indicative of the sense objects, will emerge, and 
appear before you, encircling this array. From the east, the dark 
brown Sirrhamukhi, lion-headed, her two arms crossed on her 
breast, carrying a corpse in her mouth and shaking her mane; 
from the south, tiger-headed, the red V)'iighrimukhi, her two arms 
crossed, snarling and staring with bulging eyes; from the west, 
fox-headed, the black Srgalamukhi, holding a razor in her right 
hand, and entrails in her left, eating the entrails and licking the 
blood; from the north, wolf-headed, the black-blue Svanamukhi, 
tearing apart a corpse with her two arms and staring with bulging 
eyes: from the south-east, vulture-headed, the white-yellow 
Grdhramukhi, carrying a large human corpse over her shoulder 
and holding a skeleton in [both/ hands; from the south-west, kite­
headed, the black-red Kmikamukhi, carrying a large corpse over 
her shoulders; from the north-west, crow-headed, the black Kaka­
mukhi, holding a skull in her left [hand}, a sword in her right, 
and eating a {human/ heart and lungs; and from the north-east, 
owl-headed, the blue-black Ulukamukhi, holding a vajra in her 
right [hand}, wielding a sword in her left and eating flesh. These, 
the eight Pisdci, indicative of the sense objects, will emerge from 
within your brain and arise before you, encircling the five blood-TilE GREAT L.IBI:.RATION BY IIEARIJ\iG 
drinking deities and their consorts. Do not be afraid! Recognise 
all that arises as the natural expressive power of awareness, mani­
festing naturally. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, the four Female Gatekeepers will 
also emerge from within your brain and appear before you. Recog­
nise them! From the eastern direction of your brain the white 
horse-headed A1ikusa, a blood-filled skull in her left hand; from 
the south, the yellow sow-headed Pdsa, holding a noose; from the 
west, the red lion-headed Spho(a, holding an iron chain; and from 
the north, the green snake-headed Ghar;(ii, holding a bell, will 
instantaneously arise. 6 These, the four Female Gatekeepers, will 
indeed emerge from within your brain and appear before you. 
Recognise them, as they are your own meditational deities! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, on the periphery of these thirty 
deities, who are the wrathful Herukas [and their retinues], the 
twenty-eight Isvari will emerge from within your brain and appear 
before you. They will have diverse [animal] heads and bear diverse 
weapons. But, do not be afraid! Recognise all that arises as the 
natural expressive power of awareness, manifesting naturally. 
Now, at this most critical point, remember your spiritual teacher's 
oral instructions. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, from the east, the six yogini of the 
east will emerge from within your brain and appear before you: 
the brownish white yak-headed Manurak~asi, holding fa vajra and] 
a skull; the yellowish white snake-headed Brahmar;i, holding a 
lotus; the greenish white leopard-headed Raudri, holding a trident; 
the bluish white weasel-headed Vai~r;avi, holding a wheel; the 
reddish white brown-bear-headed Kaumiiri, holding a pike; and 
the white black-bear-headed Indrii~zi, holding a noose of entrails 
in her hand. 7 Do not be afraid! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, from the south, the six yogini of 
the south will emerge from within your brain and appear before 
you: the yellow bat-headed8 Pingala, holding a razor; the reddish 
y~llow crocodile-headed Santi, holding a vase; the reddish yellow 
scorpion-headed Amrta, holding a lotus; the whitish yellow hawk­
headed Saumi, holding a vajra; the greenish yellow fox-headed 
Dar;qi, holding a cudgel, and the blackish yellow tiger-headed 
Rak~asi holding a blood-filled skull in her hand. 9 Do not be afraid! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, from the west, the six yogini of the 
west will emerge fronz within your brain and appear before you: 266 TilE TIBI:.TAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
the greenish red vulture-headed Bhak~asi, holding a club; the red 
horse-headed Rati, holdi11g a large torso; the pale red g~zn{(.Ja­
headed mighty one fRudhiramadi, consort of Malhzbulaj, holding 
a cudgel; the red dog-headed f Ekacari~zif RJk~asi, zoic/ding a uajra­
ruzor in her hand; the red lwopoe-headed Manoharika, firing an 
arrow {rum a bow; and the greenish red deer-headed protectress 
of wealth, fSiddhihzri, consort of Vasurak~itu/, holding a vase in 
her hand. 10 Do not be afraid! 
0, Child of Buddha Nuture, from the north, the six yogmi of 
the north will emerge from within your brain and ufJfJear before 
you: the bluish green snake-headed V ayudeui, brandishing an 
ensign; the reddish green ibex-heuded AgnJyi, holding a glou.Jing 
{ire-brand; the blackish green soul-headed VurJhi, holding a noose 
of fanKs; the reddish green crow-headed Vujra /Camw.u.fi/. holding 
an in{unt humun corpse; the blackish green eleplhmt-headed Blm­
janJ, holding a club and dri11king blood /from a sku/If; und the 
bluish green S1hlke-headed Vuno.zdni, holding a noose of S1Z.lkes in 
her hund. 11 Do not be afraid! 
0, Child of Buddhu Nature, the four yogini who are the /{our] 
fem~zle gatekeepers will emerge {rom within your brain und appcur 
before you: {rom the east, the white cuckoo-he,zded VujrJ f;vfuh.z­
kalif, holding a11 iron hook; from the south, the yellow goat-he,zded 
VajrJ f Muhachdgaldj, holding a noose; from the u·est, the red 
lion-headed Vajra fMahdkzmzblhzkan.zif, holding an iron ch,zin; 
and {rom the north, the black-green snake-headed Vajra f Lzmbo­
daraf, holding a bell in her hand. These four yogini, the f(:m,zle 
gutekeepers, will indeed emerge from within your brain .md appe,ir 
before you. Do not be a{raid! 
Since these twenty-eight lsl'ari emanute naturully {rom the 
expressive pozuer o{ the naturally arising deities, u·hich ,zre the 
wrathful Herukas- recognise them now! 
0, Child of Buddhu Nuture, through the expressil!e power of 
emptmess, the Buddha-body of Reality has arisen as the peaceji1l 
deities, recognise this! Through the expressive power o{ radiance, 
the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource has arisen as the wrathful 
deities. 11 Recognise this! 
At this time, zehen the assembly of the fifty-eight blood-drinkiJZg 
deities muni{ests from withm your bruin, you should recognise dll 
tlhzt drises as the natur,zlly arising luminosity of your own au•,zre-THE GRI·.:\T LIBER:\TIO:\ BY liEARl:--<G 
ness. Then, fif recognition occurs], you will immediately attain 
buddhahood, inseparable from the blood-drinking deities. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if even now you do not recognise 
this [reality], and become afraid and turn away from the [visionary 
appe.zrancesj, you will go on to experience yet further suffering. If 
recognition does not occur, all the blood-drinking deities will be 
perceived as Yama. You will be overwhelmed by fear, by awe and 
by terror at [the sight off all the blood-drinking deities; and you 
will {aint. Those [visionary appearances], which are natural mani­
festations jof actual reality}, will [seem to} have become demons, 
and you will continue to roam in cyclic existence. But [even now}, 
if you are not awed and not terrified, you will avoid the continued 
wandering within cyclic existence. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, the largest of the buddha-bodies of 
the Peaceful and \Vrathful Deities will be as vast as the sky; the 
medium ones will be the size of Mount Sumeru; and even the 
smallest will be the size of eighteen of our bodies, standing one 
above the other. u Do not be a{raid! All phenomenal existence is 
now arising as luminosities and buddha-bodies. By recognising all 
the present uisiowzry .zppearances to be the natural luminosity of 
your own intrinsic aw.zreness, manifesting as lights and buddha­
bodies, you will dissolue inseparably within the lights and buddha­
bodies, ,md buddhaiJOod will be attained. 0 Child of Buddha 
Nature, tvhateuer fearsome and terri{ying apparitions appear to 
you now, recognise them to be natural manifestations [of actual 
reality/. Do not be a{raid! Recognise these [appearances/ as inner 
radiance, your own natur.zl luminosity. Upon recognition, you will 
undoubtedly attain huddhahood, right now. That which is called 
'instantaneous per{ect buddhahood' will occur at this very 
nzornent. Remember this, and hold it in your mind! 
Child o{ Buddha Nature, i{ you do not recognise [the visionary 
appearances/now, and continue to be afraid, then all the buddha­
bodies o{ the peaceful deities will arise in the form of A1ahakala; 
aft the buddha-bodies of the wrathful deities will arise in the {orm 
o{ Yama Dharmaraja; and then all of your perceptions will turn 
into nzaleuolent {orces. In this way, you will continue to wander 
in cyclic existence. 
0, Child o{ Buddha Nature, if you do not recognise the present 
appearances as natural manifestations [of actual reality], even THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
though you may have been learned in all the stUras and tantras, 
which form the [Buddha 'sj transmitted precepts, and eL'en though 
you may have practised these doctrines for an aeon, lmddhahood 
will not be attained. Yet, if you recognise now the visionary ap­
pearances that are manifesting naturally, then, through [the 
understanding of] a single essential point, and through [the under­
standing of] a single word, you will attain buddhalwod. 
If, immediately after death, you do not recognise the appe,Jr­
ances which manifest naturally, these appearances will [euentzwllyj 
arise during the intermediate state of reality, in the forms of Yama 
Dharmaraja. The largest form assumed by Yama Dharmaraja is 
as vast as space; the medium form, tl?e size of A-fount Szmzeru, 
filling this world-system. [Thus, Yama Dharmardja will appear/, 
his upper teeth biting into his lower lip, his eyes glassy, his hair 
tied up on the crown of his head, his belly bulging and his neck 
thin, brandishing in his hand the wooden slate [documenting/ past 
actions- his mouth echoing with the cries of 'strike!', and 'kill!'­
he is drinking brains, seuering heads and ripping out internal 
organs. In this way, fit will afJpear as if his form/ {ills the entire 
world. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, when such visions arise, do not be 
afraid or terrified. Your body is a mental body, formed of habitual 
tendencies. Therefore, even if you are slain and cut into pieces, you 
will not die. You are, fin reality], a natural form of emptiness, so 
there is no need to be afraid. The forms of Yama Dharmaraja 
arise, too, from the natura/luminosity of your own intrinsic aware­
ness. They have no material substance. Emptiness cannot be 
harmed by emptiness. [Clearly} determine now that, other than 
arising from the natural expressive power of your own awareness, 
[whatever seems to appear to you/ externally -the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities, the blood-drinking f Herukasj, the diverse ani­
mal-headed deities, the rainbow lights, the frightening forms of 
Yama, etc. -these are all without substantial existence. If this 
is successfully determined, all fear and terror will be liberated 
[naturally/, just where it is. You will dissolve inseparably [with the 
visionary appearances/ and buddhahood will be attained. 
Upon recognising fthe visionary appearances/ in this way, be 
fcruently devoted, and think: 'These are my meditLZtional deities. 
They haue come to escort me on the dangerous pathway of the 
intermediate state. I take refitge in them.' Remember the Three THE GH.EAT LIBl:.H.ATION BY IIEAH.ING 
Precious jewels! Remember your meditational deity, whichever it 
may be! Call to your meditational deity by name and pray with 
the following U/ords: 'I am roaming in the intermediate state -
come quickly to rescue me! Hold me in your compassion, 0 pre­
cious meditational deity!' Call to your spiritual teacher, by name, 
and pray with the following words: 'I am roaming in the intermedi­
ate state. Rescue me! Do not let your compassion forsake me!' 
Pray devotedly, yet again, to the assembled blood-drinking deities 
and recite this aspirational prayer: 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence, /driven] by deep-seated 
habitual tendencies, 
May the assembly of fmalej Peaceful and \Vrathful Deities, 
tr.mscendent lords, draw me {orward, 
Leading me on the path o{fradiantflight, 
Through which fall/ awesome and terrifying perceptions are 
left behind. 
May the assembly of the wrathful{emalc deities, Dhatuisvari 
fand so forth/, support me from behind, 
And, thus fencircledj, may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the leuel of an utterly perfect buddha. 
Now, when 1 roam alone, sep~zrated from my loued ones, 
And [myriad/ images of emptiness arise, naturally manifesting, 
May the buddhas [quickly/ release the power of their compassion, 
And may the fear of the awesome and terrifying intermediate 
state be annulled. 
\Vhen the five radiunt lights of pristine cognition d,zwn, 
Nfay 1 recognise them as my own /nature}, without awe and 
without terror, 
And us the /manifold} forms of the Peaceful and \Y/rathful 
Deities arise, 
Al.1y I be fe,zrlessly confident and recognise /the characteristics 
off the intermediate state. 
W'hen I experience suffering as the result of negatiue past 
actions, 
A1ay the meditational deities dispel all such misery, 270 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
And as the natural sound of reality reverberates like a 
thousand peals of thunder, 
May all [sounds} be heard as the resonance of the Six Syllables. 
When I am driven on by past actions, unable to find a refuge, 
May the Great Compassionate One, Mahakaru1Jika, protect me. 
And as I experience the suffering of habitual tendencies and 
past actions, 
May the meditative stabilities of inner radiance and bliss 
[naturally] arise. 
May the fields of the five elements not rise up as a hostile force, 
And may I see [them as] the fields o(the five enlightened 
families! 
Recite this aspirational prayer with deep devotion. It is very impor­
tant. As all fear and terror dissolve, you will assuredly attain 
buddhahood in the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource- so do not 
be distracted! 
The above introduction should be given three or up to seven times. 
Even if the negativity of the deceased is very great and even if the 
inheritance of past actions is very bad, it is impossible for liberation 
not to occur -[if there is recognition]. Yet, regardless of how 
often these teachings are given, if recognition does not occur, 
[the deceased] will necessarily roam into the intermediate state of 
rebirth. The introduction to that [state] is presented below, in 
detail. 
CONCLUSION OF THE INTRODUCTION 
TO THE INTERMEDIATE STATE OF THE 
TIME Of DEATH AND THE INTERMEDIATE 
STATE Of REALITY 
Since it is generally the case that one will experience bewilderment 
at the time of death, this Liberation by Hearing is indispensable, 
whatever one's degree of familiarity with [meditative] practices. In T II E (; IU: . \ T L1 l\ 1:. IL\ T I 0 :-; 13 Y !I 1:. A R I ~ G 271 
the c.1se of those who have consickrablc familiarity with [meditat­
ive] experience the recognition of the nature of reality can arise 
instantly, as soon as awareness separates from the material body. 
Therefore, it is essential to culriv~He this experience [of reality J 
during one's lifetime. Those \vho luve been introduced to lthe 
nature of! ;nvareness, directly, and who have cultivated [this aspect 
of meditative experience! Juring their lifetime, will have the great­
est ability Juring the intermediJte state of the time of death when 
the inner radiance arises. Additionally, those who during their 
lifetime emphasised meditation on the deity, according to the gen­
eration Jnd perfection stages of the \vay of secret mantra, will have 
the greatest ability during the intL·rmniiate state of reality, when 
the visions of the l'cacdul and \\'rathful Deities arise. 
Given th<: above, it is extremely important to train the mind 
particularly in this Liberation by Hearing, \vhile one is alive. It 
should be embraced. It should be read aloud. It should be 
thoroughly comprchetH.ied. It should be taken to heart perfectly. 
It should be read ;1loud three times [<1 (.by], without fail. Irs words 
and me~111ing should he so clearly impressed on the mind that, even 
were one to be pursued by a hundred as~assins, its text and meaning 
would not be forgorren. 
This being called tht: Grc .. zt l.iberc~tion hy He .. zring, even tho~e 
who have committed the fi,·e inexpi;1blc crimes will attain libera­
tion upon hearing ! a recitation of its words]. Therefore, it should 
be n.\ld aloud in public places. It ~hould be propagJteJ. Since the 
awareness becomes many times clearer during the intl'rmediate 
state, even if this teaching is sensc:d, ~1s now, only once, and even 
if its meaning is not understood, it \vill be remembered at the 
time ! of death], without a single word being forgotten. Therefore 
it should be read aloud to the ears of ~111 during their lifetime. It 
should he read aloud across the pillows of all who are sick. It 
should be read aloud in the presence of all the bodies of the Jc:ad. 
It should be propagated, far and wide. 
To meet with this [teaching] is a gre;H good fortune. Except for 
those who have gathered the accumulations I of merit and pristine 
cognition), and purified their obscurarions, it is difficult to en­
counter. Yet, once it is heard, liberation can be: achieved just by 
avoiding a mistaken view.14 Therefore: it should be greatly cher­
ished. It is the es-;encc of all teachings. 
This complete-. the introdudion to the intermediate state of 272 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
reality, which forms part of the Great Liberation by Hearing in 
the Intermediate States, the teaching on the intermediate states 
which liberates just by being heard, or just by being seen. 
COLOPHON 
This teaching was brought forth in secret by the accomplished 
master Karma Lingpa, the eldest son of the accomplished master 
Nyinda Sangye, from the sacred place of Mount Gampodar, which 
resembles a dancing god, and is located on the banks of the river 
Serdcn. The master Karma Lingpa entrusted its transmitted pre­
cepts and authorisation to his son, Choje Lingpa. The succession 
fell in turn to his [son) Guru Suryacandra [i.e. Lama Nyinda] 
and, in his presence, I Gaganadharmasamudra [i.e. Namka Chokyi 
Gyatso) received it with devotion. PART THREE 
An Elucidation of the Intermediate State of Rebirth 
Herein is contained the Great Liberation by Hearing, an introduc­
tion to and elucidation of the intermediate state of rebirth, [which 
is an extract from] the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound 
Sacred Teaching, [entitled] Natural Liberation through [Recog­
nition of] Enlightened Intention. 1 
I bow with respect to the spiritual teachers, and assembled 
meditational deities. 
~1ay they effect liberation in the intermediate state! 
From within the Great Liberation by Hearing, the intermediate 
state of reality has already been presented. Here then follows that 
which is known as the elucidation of the intermediate state of 
rebirth. 
[INTRODUCTION TO THE MENTAL BODY] 
Although the elucidation of the intermediate state of reality has 
already been given many times, with the exception of those who 
are greatly experienced in the meditations of the [sacred] teachings 
and those who have an excellent inheritance of past actions, it is 
difficult for those lacking familiarity with meditative experience 
and those with a negative disposition to attain recognition, on 
account of the fear and terror [induced by] negative past actions. 
Therefore, from the tenth day onwards, these individuals should 
once again be reminded [of the nature of this intermediate state], 
through the following words. As before, offerings should be made 
to the Three Precious Jewels, and the Aspirational Prayer [Calling} 
to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas for Assistance should be 274 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
repcateJ.2 Then, one should read aloud the following, three or up 
to seven times, calling to the deceased by name: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen carefully and understand! Hell­
beings, gods and those with the body of the intermediate state are 
born in a supernormal manner. Formerly, when the visions of 
the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities arose before you during the 
intermediate state of reality -you did not recognise them. Then, 
overwhelmed by terror, you will haue fainted. Four and a hal{ days 
later, upon ,Hvakening {rom this faint, your consciousness has 
again become clear and a body, resenzbling your former one, has 
arisen. This ['body' J is described in the tantras:.l 
H,n•ing the bodily {urm of one's past and emergent existences, 
Complete with ,zll sense-faculties, and the power of mz­
obstructed nzouement. 
Endowed with miraculous abilities derived {rom past actions, 
Visible to those similar in kind and through pure clairvoyance. 
Here, 'past and enzergent'4 means that your {present} body [which 
is a product of} your past habitual tendencies will resemble a 
body of flesh and blood, but, like a body of the Auspicious Aeon 
(bhadrakalpa) it will also be radimzt and possess cert,zin o{ the 
m,zjor and minor 1narks. Since this fstLZte] is an apparitional experi­
ence of the mental body, it is called 'the mental body o{ appar­
itional experience in the intermediate state·. 5 At this time, if you 
are to be born as a god, you will come to experience the appar­
itional field of the realm of the gods. Depending on whichever of 
the realms you are to take birth in, whether that of the antigods, 
humans, animals, anguished spirits or hell-beings, you will come 
to experience its particular apparitional field. Therefore, ·p,zst' 
means that for three and a half days )'Oll will possess the bodily 
form /which is a product/ of your past habitual tendencies and 
existences. And 'emergent' nzeans that, after [three and a half 
d.1ysj, the apparitional field of the next realm into which you are 
to be born, will'emerge'. Hence, the expression 'past and enzer._r<ent' 
{existences/. 
\VIJLztel'er apparitional fields emerge at this time, do not be 
drawn by them! Do not hecome attached to them! Do not cling to 
them! I( you cling to them and become attached, you will continue T II L (;tU'. t\ T LIIH. RAT I 0 l'i H Y II EAR IN G 275 
to roam amongst the six classes [of beings} and be turning towards 
suffering. Although, until yesterday, the intermediate state of 
reality arose [zuithin you}, you did not recognise it. As a result you 
have been compelled to wander here. Now, just as was [formerly] 
introduced by your spiritual teacher, if you are able to cultivate, 
wzdistractedly, fa recognition of] the essential nature [of reality}, 
if you can rest and abide without grasping and without activity, 
directly, in the unwavering, naked awareness, which is radiance 
and emptiness conjoined, you can attain liberation and avoid wan­
dering, yet further, towards the womb entrances. If you are not 
able to achieve this recognition, then visualise your meditational 
deity, whichever it may be, or your spiritual teacher, as being 
[seated} on the crown of your head and be intensely and fervently 
devoted. This is most important. Again and again, do not be 
distracted. 
If [the deceased] docs indeed recognise this essential nature [of 
reality], he or she will attain liberation and avoid roaming further 
amongst the six classes [of beings]. But, on account of negative 
past actions, recognition is not easy to achieve, and therefore, one 
should reiterate [the introduction], in the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen [carefitlly] yet again! The 
phrase, 'Complete with all sense-faculties, and the power of zmob­
structed mouement'6 means that, euen though you may have been 
blind, deo1f or lame while you were alive, now, in the intermediate 
state, your eyes see {arms, your ears hear sounds and all your 
sense-faculties are faultless, clear and complete. Hence {the tantra] 
says 'complete with all sense faculties'. Recognise this {sensory 
clarity], for it is a sign that you haue died and are wandering in 
the intermediate state. Remember this oral instruction! 0, Child 
of Buddha Nature, 'unobstructed' means that the body which you 
now have is a mental body. Your awareness is now separated from 
its physical support. Therefore, this is not a body of solid form. 
Accordingly, you now have the ability to move wzobstructedly; 
penetrating to the core of all forms, you can pass through Mount 
Sumeru, and through dwellings, the earth, stones, boulders and 
mowztains. Indeed, other than your mother's womb and the 'Inde­
structible Seat',-you can pass back and forth even through .Mount 
Sumeru itself. Remember the advice of your spiritual te,Jcher- for THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THE l>EAD 
this {ability/ is a sign that you are wandering in the intermediate 
state of rebirth. [Recognise this} and pray to the meditational deity 
MahakarUI_zika. 
0, Child of Buddlhl Nature, the phrase 'endowed with miracu­
lous abilities derived from past actions '8 does not mean that you 
necessarily possess any enlightened attributes, or any miraculous 
ability in meditative stability, but that you have a miraculous 
ability which results from your past actions and accords with 
your past actimzs. 9 [Consequently}, you will have the ability to 
circumambulate Mount Sumeru and the four continents, in an 
instant. Merely in the time it takes to withdraw or hold out an 
arm, you can travel instantly anywhere you wish, just by thinking 
of your desired destination. Do not be fascinated by these diverse 
and haphazard miraculous abilities. Do not indulge in them. Of 
all the things which you have the ability to recall, there is not one 
which you cannot make manifest. You have the ability now, to 
manifest {any aspect of your past/, zmimpededly. Therefore recog­
nise this and pray to your spiritual teucher. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, as for the phrase 'visible to those 
similar in kind and through pure clairvoyance', 10 the words 'similar 
in kind' mean that in the intermediate state, those of a similar kind 
of birth will come to perceive one another. Thus, in the CLlSe of 
those 'similar in kind' who are to be born as gods, the gods {to be} 
perceive one another. Similarly, those that are 'similar in kind' to 
any of the six classes [of beings/, will come to perceive one another. 
Do not become attuched fat the sight of these beings/! !vteditute on 
[the meditational deity] Mahakaru1_zika. The words 'visible through 
pure clairvoyance' do not refer to the [clazrvoyancej which results 
from the meritorious qualities of the gods and so forth, but they 
do refer to the pure clairvoyunce with which those of genuine 
meditative concentration perceive. 11 However, this is not fa clair­
voyance/ that can perceiue /the beings of the intermediate state} at 
all times. If you are intent on seeing [beings of like nature in this 
intermediate state/ then they will be perceiued. If you are not so 
ilztent, they will not be perceived. This [clairvoyance/ will dissolve, 
as soon as your concentration is distracted. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, with a body having qualities such 
us these just described, you will {once again} see your homeland 
~.-md your relatiues, as if in a dream. Yet, euen though you call out 
to your relutiues, they will not reply. You will see your family and Til E G R F.:\ T Ll B 1:. IL\ Tl 0 :-; 13 Y II E J\ R I ~ G 277 
relatiues crying and realise: 'I am de.ILi. What should I do now?' 
Thinking this, you cui// be ouenchclmed by intense suflering- you 
will{eellike J fish [expelled /rom the Wt.lterj, writhing on hot sand. 
Although you will suffer [on reulising th,zt you are dead}, this is 
not helpful [to you now/. If you haue a spiritual teacher, pruy to 
your spiritual te.zcher! Pr~zy to the meditational deity, AfahJkdru-
1.1ika! Although you will feel att.1ched to your relatives, this is not 
helpfitl [to you now f. Do not be attached! Pray to Mahakdru1_zika, 
and be free of suffering, au·e and fear. 
0, Child of Buddha N.zture, your /present/ azc~.-zreness, freed 
from its [physical/ support, /is being blown/ by the coursing uital 
energy of past actions. Choicelessly, riding the horse of breath, it 
drifts directionless, like a {e.lther on the u·ind. To ~.-zll those who 
are crying, you will call out: 'I am here! Do not cry!' But they will 
not hear you. Yet agdin, you will re,zlise 'I am dead' and experience 
a very profound despair. Do not be absorbed by this suffering! 
Continuously, there will be greyness, like autumn tcl'ilight, with 
neither d~.zy nor night. The intermedi.zte states [between death .md 
birth/ tuilllast {or one week, or two, or three, or {our, or fiue, or 
six or seven weeks -up to forty-nine days in all. It is said that 
suffering in the intermedi.zte state o{ rebirth will last, generally 
speaking, {or twenty-one days. Hocl'el'er, since the durution [of 
this state/ is bused on p .. 1st actions, .1 specific number of d .. zys is not 
certain. 
0, Child o/ Buddha N .. llure, ,zt this time the fierce, turbulent, 
utterly zmbear.zble lmrric.me o{ past ~.-1ctions will be /swirling] 
behind you, driuing you on. Do not be a/raid! This is your own 
bewildered perception. Be/ore you, there will be a terrifying, dense 
and un~zthomable d.zrkncss, echoi11g with cries o{ 'Strike!' and 
'Kill!' Do not be ,z{r,ziJ! A1oreouer, in the case of very ncgatiue 
beings, a swarm of carnivorous ogres will arise, executors of the 
un{ailing /mu of c.wse and effect, 12 brandishing an array o/ 
werzpo11s, and screaming out aggressively: 'Strike!' mzd 'Kill!' You 
w~ll imagine that you ,zre being pursued by terril)·ing wild animals. 
You will imagine that you ~.zre being pursued by hordes of people, 
and /that you .1re struggling/ through snow, through rain, through 
blizzards and through darkness. There will he the sound of moun­
tains crumbling, o{lakes flooding, of fire spreading and the ro,lr 
of fierce winds springing up. Terrified, you will try to flee wherever 
you c.m, but your p.lth ahead will [suddenly} be cut of/ by three THI-. TIBETA;:o.; BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
precifJices: one white, one red .md one black, all three awesomely 
frig,htening; you u·i/1 feel as if on the verge of f.liling. 
0, Child o{ Buddlhz Nature, these are not truly precipices. They 
are .wersimz, att.zclmzent and delusion, respectiuely. u Know now 
th,Jt this is the intermediate state of rebirth, and call to [the medi­
tation,lf deity/ Mulh1kdru1.zik~z. by name, and pray: '0, lord Maha­
ktlrw.zika, Spirituul Teucher and Precious Jewel, saue me (say your 
name) {rom {ulling into lower existences' [Pray with deep commit­
ment in this w~zyf; do not forget! 
At this st~1ge, in the <-"use of those individu.zls uAJO have g~zthered 
the .zccwnul,lfions {of merit and pristine cognition] and haue sin­
cerely practised the teachings, one will be welcomed by [uisicms 
ofl alnmdant riches and one will experience manifold blissfitl and 
happy st.ztes. fIn the case of those individuuls who are indifferent 
or deluded, uAw haue been neither uirtuous nor negative, one 
will experience neither pleasure nor pain, but only an apathetic 
dclusion.t~ Whichever of these h,zppens, 0, Child of Buddha 
N,zture, tuhateucr objects of desire or blissful or happy states 
appe.zr be{ore you, do not be att.zched to them. Do not cling to 
them! Be free from attachment and clinging ,md mentully of{er 
these /experiences] to your spiritual teacher and to the /Three] 
Precious Jewels. P~1rticularly, if these visions are of indiflerence, 
deuoid o{ happiness or pain, .1hide in the experience o{ the Great 
SeLzl, u•here awareness is fn~zturally present/, without meditation 
and without distraction. This is uery imfJortant. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, at this time, you will try to find 
shelter /from the hurricane of past actions/ below bridges, in man­
sions, in temples or grass-huts or beside stztpas and so forth, hut 
this fshclterj will be momentary, it will not last. Your awareness, 
now sep.mzted {rom your body, u.Ji/1 not rest and you will feel 
rC(kless, angry and ,z(raid. Your consciousness will be f.zltering, 
superfici.zl, .111d nebulous. Ag,zin you will realise: 'Alas! I am de.zd, 
whut should I do now?' Reflecting on this, your consciousness tllill 
grow s,zd, your heart will he chilled and you will {eel intense and 
boundless misery. Your mind is being compelled to move on, 
without settlillg in one place. Do not indulge in all kinds of n1em­
ories! Let your awareness rest in an undistr.zcted state! 
[The time will come when you will realise th,ztj you have no 
(ood, except that u•hich has been dedicated to you. As for com­
pd1Iionship, fherej, similurly, there will be no certainty. These TI-ll: GREAT LIBFIC\TIO~ BY HFARI~G 
are both indic,ztions that the mental body is u:.:mdering in the 
intermediate state of rebirth. Your present feelings of happiness 
and sorrow are [now] driuen by your past actions. 
[Once again}, seeing your honzelund, circle o{ friends, rehllir•es 
and even your own corpse, you will realise: 'I am dead! \VIhlt 
should I do now?' You will feel deeply saddened /by your existence] 
in a mental body, and wish, '0 that I might obtain a physical 
body!' Consequently, you will experience roaming here and there 
in search of a body. You might euen attempt, many times, to 
re-enter your own body, but a long time has alre.uiy elapsed i1z the 
[preuiousj intcrmedi..:zte state of re.1lity. In winter your body zcill 
have fro::.en, in summer it u·ill have decayed. Altenwtiuely, your 
relatiues will haue cremated it, buried it in a gr.we, or offered it to 
the birds and wild animals. Not finding a w.zy back, you will/eel 
utterly distressed, and you will certainly feel yourself [trying to] 
squeeze [into the creuicesj between stones and rocks. Torments 
such as these will enfold you. This being the intermediate state of 
rebirth, so long dS you search for a body, you will experience 
nothing but suffering. Therefore give up your clinging to a body 
and rest in a state of 1101h1Ctiulty, [undistractedlyj. 
Liberation can be obtained in the intermediate state, as a result of 
the above introduction. However, even though this introduction 
is given, due to negative past actions, recognition may not occur. 
So again, you should call to the deceased by name and say the 
following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, (call to the deceased by name), /iste11 
[to me}. It is due to your own past actions tlhzt you ,1re now 
sufferi1lg in this U'<ly. No one else is responsible- this is solely the 
result of your own past actions. Pray ardently now to the Three 
Precious J eu•els. They will protect you. If you do not pray intensely 
now, especially il you do not know how to meditate on the Great 
Seal, or if you cannot meditate 011 a meditational deity, the 'innate 
good conscience' within you15 llli/1 now gather together all your 
virtuous actions, counting them out with white pebbles, and the 
'innate bad conscience' within you will gather together all your 
non-virtuous actions. counting them out with black pebbles. At 
this moment you will tremble with extreme {ear, az.oe and terror. 
You u.,:il/ tell lies, saying, '/ haue not committed non-virtuous .!.So TilE TIBErA:-; BOOK OF THE DEAL> 
actions!' But at this, Yanw will s,zy: 'I shall consult the mirror of 
past actions. '1" In the mirror of past actions, fall your uirtues and 
non-uirtucsj will he reflected L'il'idly ,md precisely. Your attempts 
at deceit zuill be of no use. Tying a rope around your neck, Yamu 
will drLZg yuu (oru.'ard. He will sever [your head/ at the neck, 
extr,zct your heart, pull out your entr,zils, lick your brains, drink 
your blood, e,zt your flesh and suck your bones. Despite this, you 
will not die. 1-~t·en as your body is [repeatedly/ cut into pieces, it 
will he continuously reuiL·ed. Experiencing being cut into pieces in 
this lULl)'. time u(ter time, will c.:zuse enormous suffering. From the 
moment the counting o{ the pebbles begins, do not be a{rLiid! Do 
not be terrified! Do not lie. ,md do not be a{r,lid o{ Yama. The 
body ll'hidJ you nozv h,ll•e is a mentul h.ody; therefore, euen though 
you experience being slain ,md cut into pieces, you cumzot die. 
f Recognise now, tlhlt j in re.zlity, you need h,zve no fe"zr, because, 
fin truth/, your fhodyj is a n..ztural {orm o{emptiness. The acolytes 
of Ymn~.1 ,zre also, fin reality/. n,ztur,lf forms of emptiness- these are 
your own bczl'ildered perceptions. Your body, formed of mentul 
propensities, is fa nutur.JI form o{j emptiness. Fmptiness camzot 
hurm emptiness. Signlessness c~.11mot harm signlessness. Outside, 
und distinct {rom your own bewildering perceptions, Yama, gods, 
m,lleuolent forces, the hull-headed Rak~a and so on, do not substan­
tially exist.1
.,. Recognise this! Recognise, now, tlhlt this is the inter­
mediute st-zte! J>/,zce your mind in the meditatil'e stuhility of the 
Great Scul! I{ you do not know how to medit,zte, directly examine 
the cssena o{ tlhzt which is producing your fear and terror. This 
f essence J is a st.z rk emptiness, completely without inherent existence 
in any respect wlhltsocl'er! This [stLZrk emptiness/ is the Buddh.:z­
hody of Re,dity. Yet, this emptiness is not ~.1 L'LZcuous or nihilistic 
emptilzcss. The essenti,d nature of this emptiness is an awesome, 
direct and radiLZIZt aw,zreness, which is the enlightened intention of 
/the Buddha-body of/ Perfect Resource. lndeed, emptiness and radi­
.znce arc not sefhJrate: the essential ,.hlture of emptiness is rudi,mce 
Lind the essential 1Wture o{ r,Idiunce is emptiness. This indiuisible, 
naked, unclouded .md exposed awt..~rc1zess. present as it is right now 
in u nLltztr,d u1zcontriued state, is the Ruddhu-body of J:ssentialiry.1s 
furthermore, the lhllztrul expressive power [of this Buddha-body 
o{ Essenti.dityj is the compussionutc Buddha-body o{ EmL-Znation, 
tchich .nises et•eryzuhere Ll'ithout obstruction. 
0. Child o{ Huddh.z N .. llure, listen f to me/ nou•, and do not be TilE GREAT LIBERATIOI' BY HEARII'G 
distracted. By merely recognising [the essential nature of your 
experience} in the above way, you will attain perfect buddhahood, 
endowed with these four buddha-bodies. Do not be distracted! 
The division between buddhas and sentient beings is determined 
by this [recognition}. If you are distracted at this critical moment, 
the opportunity to escape from the swamp of suffering will be lost. 
It is said of this very nzornent: 
In an instant, penetrating analysis is made. 
In an instant, perfect buddhahood is attained. 
Until yesterday, because you were distracted, even though so many 
aspects of the intermediate states have arisen, you did not attain 
recognition. [Up to this time}, you have experienced so much fear 
and terror. Now, if you continue to be distracted, the lifeline of 
compassion, suspended to you, will be cut off and you will move 
on to a place where there is no [immediate} prospect of liberation. 
So be careful. 
Through this introduction, even though [the deceased! may have 
failed to attain recognition previously, he or she will be able to do 
so at this stage and consequently attain liberation. 
If, ho\vever, [the deceased] is a lay person, who does not know 
how to meditate, you should say the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if you do know how to meditate 
you should call to mind the Buddha, the [sacred} teachings, the 
[sublime/ assembly of monks and nuns, and [the meditational 
deity/ M.1hakaru~zika and pray to them. Meditate on all the fearful 
and terrifying appearances as being [forms} of Mahakaru~ika, or 
your meditational deity. Remember your spiritual teacher and 
remember the name which you received during empowerment cere­
monies in the human world. 19 [Say this name to} Yama Dharma raja 
_and do not be afraid of him. [Know now, that/ even if you were 
to plunge down over the precipices, you would not be harmed. So, 
abandon your fear and your terror. 
Even though liberation may not have been achieved previously, 
if the above introduction is accepted, [the deceased] will attain 
liberation at this juncture. z.H2. TilE TllH.TA!'-i BOOK OF THE DF:\0 
Yet, since there is the possibility that [the deceased! will not 
achieve recognition, even though the introduction has been given, 
it is very important to persevere. Therefore, once agJin, one should 
call to the deceased by name and say the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, your present perceptions can, like a 
catapult, in a instant, cast you into the most awesome st~ztes; either 
blissful or full of suffering. Therefore, now. fit is critical that/ your 
perceptions are not coloured by either attachment or auersion. 
It may be that you are about to t.1ke birth in the higher realms, 
yet at the time when the perceptions of the higher realms occur, 
your liuing rel,ztives, now left behind, are sacrificing and offering 
many anim.1ls on your behalf, dedicating {this actiuityj to you, the 
deceased. Corrupted perceptions teill thus arise ,md consequently 
an intense auersion may well up [within youj, and this will form a 
connecting link to a birth in the hell realms. Therefore, wlhzteucr 
activities occur in the place that you have left behind, meditate on 
loving kindness, and ensure th,zt az•ersion docs not .1risc! 
Alternatiuely, your mind nz,zy grow attached to your wealth ~md 
possessions, now left behind, or else, knowing that your u•ealth 
and possessions arc being enjoyed Lind owned by others, you may 
become both attached to those worldly goods and also hatefiJI 
towards those left behind fwho are using your possessions/. As a 
result of this, a connecting link will cert,zinly be formed to a birth 
amongst the hell beings or amongst the anguished spirits, euen 
though you may have been at the point of attaining birth in {one 
on the higher realms. However attached you may be to the wealth 
now felt behind, you do not haz•e the ability to enjoy it. Since it is 
absolutely of no use to you, ab,mdon your attaclmzent and yearning 
for the wealth that you have left behind. Let it go! Be decisiue! 
Regardless of who is enjoying your wealth, do not be possessive! 
Let it go! Cultiuate devotion, and imagine that you are oflering 
these [worldly possessions/ to your spiritu,zl teacher mzd to the 
/Three] Precious jewels. Rest in a state free from attachment ~md 
free from clinging. 
Once again, ez•en when the Kankar)IdharaQI incantation {or the 
dead is being recited for you and the Purification of the Lo\vcr 
Realms (Sarvadurgatiparisodhanatantra) is being recited 011 your 
behalf. you may perceive. with your present subtle cognitive ability. 
th.zt these [rites} ,zre being per{ormed impurely and distr,zctcdly, T II E l; R F. AT Ll !H. RAT I 0 N B Y H L\ R I :-I G 
and that those [who are performing these rituals/ are impure in 
both their commitments and vows ~md are careless in their conduct. 
As a result, you may huve no confidence in them, you may form a 
bud opinion of them, and you may become fearfully and horribly 
aware of their negative past actions, etc., as well as of their impure 
practice of the {sacred/ teachings and the rituals. Feeling this, you 
tuill experience the utmost s~1dness, and think: 'Alas, they have 
betrayed me! They haue truly betrayed me!' As a consequence of 
your profound disenchantment, instead of muintaining purity of 
perception and [feelings of/ respect, negatiue opinions and loss 
of confidence will arise within you. Thus, [these perceptions and 
feelings/ will{orm u connecting link that will certainly propel you 
into the lower existences, and, in this way, {your subtle cognitive 
ability and the rituuls recited on your be1Ja!f7 will not haue been 
of benefit, but rather o{ gre~.lt harm. 
Hou/ever impure may be the pructice of the [sacred} teuchings 
by your {riends now left behind, you must maint,zin respect and 
purity of perception from the depths of your heart. Think to 
yourself: 'i\1y own perception is so polluted! How could the 
speech of the buddhas be impure! These [impure perspectiues] haue 
arisen as a consequence of my own impure perception, and [will 
appear to me] just as the fl~.zws on my face will be reflected in a 
mirror. As for these {individuals performing the rituals, in reality] 
their bodies are the {sublime/ community o{ monks and nuns, their 
speech is the genuine [sacred/ teaching, and their minds are the 
essence of the buddhas. Therefore, I take refuge in them.' Thinking 
thus, whateuer actiuities occur in the place that you have left 
behind, they tl'ill cert..Jinly be beneficial to you. It is extremely 
importLZnt to maintain this purity of perception. Do not forget 
this! 
Euen if you are about to be born into the lower existences, 
[yet yo11 do nwint~.lin purity o{ perception}, and you perceive the 
; elatives that you h~we left behind practising the uirtuous te,1chings, 
unstuined by negativity, and you see your spiritual teachers and 
musters purely practising the rituals with virtuous body, speech 
and mind, you will feel great joy. Simply through this [experience 
of great joy], cuen though you were about to fall into lower exist­
ences, this [joy/ will form a connecting link, which will certainly 
turn you back towards the higher realms. Since there is such 
manifold benefit, do not now lapse into impure perception. It is TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
extremely important to maintain purity of perception and to be 
unbiasedly devoted. So, be careful! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, in short, since your awareness 
during this intermediate state lacks any [material] support, it is 
light and volatile, and therefore, whatever uirtuous or non-virtuous 
perceptions arise, these are very powerful. Do not be absorbed by 
non-uirtuous thoughts! Call to mind the virtuous practices of your 
past! Even if you did not engage in virtuous practices [during your 
life/, maintain purity of perception and deep devotion! Pray to 
your meditational deity or to Mahakaru1.tika, and with a powerful 
longing repeat the following aspirational prayer:20 
Now when I roam alone, separated from loz,ed ones, 
And [myriad} images of emptiness arise, naturally nzanifesting, 
May the buddhas [quickly/ release the power of their 
compassion, 
And may the fear of the awesome and terrifying intermediate 
state be annulled. 
When I experience suffering, as the result of negative past 
actions, 
May the meditational deity f Mahakaru1Jikaj dispel all such 
misery, 
And as the natural sound of reality reverberates like a 
thousand peals of thunder, 
· May all sounds be transformed into the resonance of the Six 
Syllables. 
When I am driven on by past actions, unable to find a refuge, 
May the Great Compassionate One, Mahakaru~zika, protect 
1ne, 
And as I experience the suffering of habitual tendencies and 
past actions, 
May the meditative stabilities of inner radiance and bliss 
[naturally] arise. 
Say this aspirational prayer with ardent longing; it will certainly 
lead you on to the path. Be absolutely certain that this faspirational 
prayer/ will not deceive you. This is most important! THE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARI:'I/G 
Through these words, [the deceased] will regain his or her focus, 
and recognition will occur. Then, liberation will be attained. 
[OBSTRUCTION OF THE W0~1B 
ENTRANCES] 
Even though this introduction may have been given many times, 
due to the potency of strong negative past actions, recognition 
may be difficult. It is very beneficial, therefore, to repeat [the 
introduction] now, many times. Again, therefore, calling to the 
deceased by name, you should say the following words [at least] 
three times: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if you have not taken to heart [the 
introduction] which has gone before, from now on, the body of 
your past life will grow more faint and the body of your next life 
will grow more vivid. At this, you will be dismayed, and you will 
think: 'I am experiencing such misery! Now I will look lor what­
ever kind of body I can find.' Thinking in this way, you will move 
haphazardly and randomly towards whatever might appear and 
consequently the six lights indicative of the six realms of living 
beings will dawn; and, according to your past actions, [the light 
of the realm] into which you are to be born will shine the most of 
all. 0, Child of Buddha Nature, listen! What are these six lights, 
you may ask? A dull white light indicative of the realm of the gods 
will arise. A dull red light indicative of the realm of the antigods 
will arise. A dull blue light indicative of the human realm will 
arise. A dull green light indicative of the animal realm will arise. 
A dull yellow light indicative of the realm of the anguished spirits 
will arise and a dull smoky light indicative of the realm of the 
~ell-beings will arise. These six lights will emerge. And at this time, 
your [present] body will take on the colour of the light of the realm 
Into which you are to be born. 0, Child of Buddha Nature, at this 
juncture, the essential points of the oral instructions are extremely 
important. 
Meditate now on the light [that dawns] as being Mahakaru-
1'}ika! Meditate on the thought that when the light dawns, it is 
Mahakaru7Jika. This is the most profound crucial point. It is T 1-1 1-. T I B [ r A ~ B 0 0 K l) F T H E D 1: :\ D 
extremely import~mt, hcc.wse {this oral instruction/ obstructs 
birth. 
Altenwtiuely. you should medit.zte for a long time on your medi­
t,ztional deity, whid)(•z•er it m,zy be. f.\1edit,Jtc on the deity/ appc,zr­
ing like ,m illusion, completely {ree {rom inherent existence. This 
is c,zl!ed f the pr,zctice off the 'pure illusion-like body·. Accordingly, 
dissoh•e /the {orm o{J the meditati1m .. 1l deity {rom the extremities 
[inwards}, until it disappe.zrs completely, and abide in the {result­
ant/ st.zte of emptiness and radiance, where nothing at all substan­
tially exists and where there is no subjcctiz.·e apprehension. 
Medi!Lzte yet ag,zin on the mcdit,lfional deity . .\1edit..zte again on 
the inner r,uh.m,-e. Medit,lfe ,J!tenz.ztcly in this w..zy, ,md ,z{ter this, 
dissoh·e your ,m·,zrelzess itscl{{rom the extremities f imu.zrds. into 
emptiness and r,zdi,mccj. W'herez·cr there is space there is au·!.lre­
ness. V:.'herever there is azl',zreness there is the Buddh.z-body of 
Re,zlity. Abide nakedly, therefore, in the st£7te of the zmimpeded 
Buddh.z-hody o{ Re,zlity. free {rom conaptu,z/ c/,zhor.ztion. [Abid­
ing/ in this state, birth tl'ill he obstmdcd ,md huddh.dJOod ll'ill be 
att,zincd. 
Yet, those unfamiliar with meditative experience and those very 
weak in their practice will not be able to understand rand 3pply 
the above introductions]. Once again, overcome by confusion, they 
will w;mder towards the womb entrances. Thus, the teachings 
which obstruct the womb entrJnces become of great importance 
and you should, once again, call to the de(eased by n~1me and say 
the following words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if you lhwe 11ot att,7ined recognition 
fas a result of the introductions/ which haue gone bc{ore, then, 
based on the putclzc.-y ol your past actions, the perception will arise 
that you .zre mot•ing upu•,zrds, or mul'ing hori;:.ont .. zlly or mouing 
dou•llw,zrds.21 As this OC(ltrs, )'Olt should medit,1te 011 lvlah~.zk.zru­
~rika. Remcnzh,•r this! 
Yet ,zg .. zin, tiS described hc/~>re, the experience u·i/1 arise of hcing 
pursued hy whirlwi11ds, hli:.:.z,zrds, IJLzil, or {o}!.; and a crowd'of 
f)(:oplc, and yolt zuill he trying to esc.zpc. Those who are lacking in 
merit ll'illcx{Jcricncc th.zt they ,zre fleeing tou/..zrds .z pl,zcc of suffer­
mg. Thusc ll'ith merit ll'ill exfJerience arriz·ing at a place of h.zppi­
ncss. 0, Child ol Buddh.z N.zture, now, ,zt this point, the signs of THE <.;RL\T LIBER:\TIO~ BY IIE:\RING 
the enuironment into which you L'lre to be born, on one amongst 
the four continents, will arise. Specifically for this moment, there 
are many profound essential points of oral instruction. Therefore 
listen, now, without distraction. Even though, previously, you 
have not taken to heart the essential instructions introduced to 
you, you can do so now, {or even those whose practice is very 
weak can underst.md [and apply one on the following essential 
instructions. So listen, now, without distraction. 
At this stage, it is extremely important that you carefully employ 
the methods for obstructing the womb entrances. [Principally}, 
there are two such methods of obstruction. These are: [first], the 
nzethod which obstructs the person who is to enter the womb and, 
[second/, the methods which obstruct the womb which is to be 
entered. 
The oral teaching for the method which obstructs the person who 
is to enter the womb, is as follows: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, (call to the deceased by name) visualise 
notu your meditational deity, whichever it may be, with vibrancy. 
[MeditLZte on the deity/ as [vividly} apparent, yet completely lacking 
in inherent existence, like [the reflection on the moon in water. If 
you do not have a specific meditational deity, then visualise the 
lord MahdkarznJika, again with great vibrancy. Then, [gradually], 
dissolve [the image of] the medit~1tional deity from the extremities 
[inwards, until it disappears completely] and then meditate on the 
[resultant union/ o{ inner rLZdiance and emptiness, which is utterly 
free from any objective referent. This is the profound essential 
point. Meditate in this way, for it is said that by this means entry 
into a womb will be averted. 
Should even this !introduction] not cause obstruction and should 
[the deceased] continue to draw closer to the act of entering a 
womb, there are also the profound oral instructions which obstruct 
the womb entrances. These are as follows: 
[0, Child of Buddha Nature,} listen [carefully}! In the recitation 
of the Root Verses of the !Six] Intermediate States, the following 
lines are spoken. Repeat these, now, after me:22 THE TIBI::.TAN BOOK OF THI::. DEAD 
Alas, now as the intermediate state of rebirth arises before 
me, 
I must with one-pointed intention concentrate my mind, 
And resolutely connect with the residrwl potency of my 
virtuous past actions. 
I must obstruct the womb entrances and call to mind the 
methods of reversal. 
This is the time when perseverance and purity of perception 
are imperatiue. 
I must give up all iealousy and medit,zte on my spiritual 
teacher with consort. 
It is extremely important to clearly repeat these uerses aloud, to 
arouse your memories {of past virtues/, to rneditate on this [prayer} 
and to experientially cultiu,zte its meaning. The meaning of these 
verses is as follows: the line 'now as the intermediate state of 
rebirth arises before me'2-' explains th~.zt you are now roaming in 
the intermediate state of rebirth. As an indication of this, if you 
look into water, you will not see your reflation. Your body dues 
not even cast a shadow. These are both signs that you do not have 
a solid body of flesh and blood, but that you arc roaming, with a 
{subtle] mental body, in the intennediate state of rebirth. 
Now, therefore, you 'must with one-pointed intention concen­
trate your mind', 24 undistractedly. At this moment, this /singularity 
of} intention is by itself the most important factor. 1 tis like ,1 horse 
being controlled by the use of a bridle. Whatever your intention 
focuses upon, this will come about. Do not turn your mind to 
negatiue past actions! C1.1/l to mind, now, your connections in 
the human world with the {s1.1credj teachings and instructions, 
remember the empou./erments and oral transmissions [prel'iously 
received], remember [your connection with] this Liberation by 
Hearing in the Intermediate States, and so forth. it is extremely 
important that you 'resolutely connect with the residual potency 
of your virtuous past actions·. 25 Do not forget! Do not be dis­
tracted! The present moment is the dividing-line between pro­
gression and regression. The present moment is the time wh;n, 
by lapsing into laziness, even for an instant, you will experience 
constant suffering. The present moment is the tirne when, by cmz­
ce1ztr~.zting ll'ith a singul,1r intention, )'OU will achieue constant 
lwppiness. Concentrate your mind with a single-pointed intention. TilE Gl{LAT LIBERATION BY IIEARING 
'Resolutely connect with the residual potency of your virtuous past 
actions.' 
Now is the time when you must obstruct the womb entrances. 
It is said fin the verses] that you 'must obstruct the womb entrances 
and call to mind the methods of reversal. This is the time when 
perseverance and purity of perception are imperative'.26 You have 
noll! arrived at that stage. Your priority now is to obstruct the 
womb entrances. There are five methods which will bring about 
obstruction of the womb entrances, so keep them carefully in 
mind. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, at this stage, the perception will 
arise of a male and a female engaging in sexual intercourse. Upon 
perceiving this, do not to enter between the male and the female, 
but be mind fit! and 'meditate on' the male and the female as being 
your 'spiritual teacher with consort'. 27 Prostrate yourself before 
them and make offerings, emanating these with your mind. Be 
intensely deuoted and request instructions from [your spiritual 
teacher and consort]. Just by inte11tly focusing your thought in this 
way, the womb entrances will certainly be obstructed. 
Should [the womb entrances] not be successfully obstructed 
through this method and you are nonetheless drawn ever nearer 
to entering the womb, then meditate now on the spiritual teacher 
and consort as being your personal meditational deities, whichever 
these may be, or [if you do not have a personal meditational deity}, 
meditate on the spiritu£Zl teacher and consort as being Mahakaru-
1Jika and his consort. Again, make offerings, emanating these with 
your mind and generate the thought very intently: 'I request [the 
attainment of your} spiritu,ll accomplishment!' Thereby, the womb 
entrances will be obstructed. 
Should even this not obstruct the womb entrances, and you are 
still drawn ever nearer to entering the womb, the third method, 
which reverses attachment and auersion, is now to be revealed to 
you. There are four modes of birth: birth from an egg, birth from a 
-womb, supernormal birth, and birth from warmth and moisture. 2H 
Among these, the birth from an egg and birth from a womb are 
very similar, in that in both cases you will see the male and the 
female engaged in sexual union, as [described] above. If, based on 
either attachment or auersion, you enter a womb at this time, 
you will be born as a horse, bird, dog, human, or whatever is 
appropriate. If you are to be born as a male, you will experience THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAO 
the perceptions of a male. You will feel intense aversion towards 
the father and you will feel jealousy and attachment towards the 
mother. If you are to be born as a female, you will experience the 
perceptions of a female. You will feel intense envy and jealousy 
towards the mother and you will feel intense attachment and affec­
tion towards the father. This [emotional arousal] will cause you 
to enter a womb. Here you will experience the 'coemergent delight', 
in the midst of the meeting between the sperm and the ovum. From 
that state of bliss you will faint into unconsciousness, and as time 
passes, the embryo will come to maturity in the womb, moving 
through [its various stages of development}, that is, the clotting of 
the embryo, the oval elongation of the embryo, 29 and so forth until 
finally, you will emerge /from the womb] and open your eyes. 
Now, you will have turned into a puppy. Previously having been 
a human being, you will now have become a dog. So consequently, 
you will suffer in a dog-kennel, or similarly, in a pigsty, or an 
anthill, or a wormhole, or else you may be born as a baby bull, a 
goat, a sheep and so forth. There is no way back. You will experi­
ence all manner of sufferings in a state of great obscurity and 
delusion. Through this process you will continue to remain within 
the six classes of living beings, including the realms of the hell 
beings and the anguished spirits. You will be completely drained 
by boundless sufferings. There is nothing more awesome or fright­
ening than this! Oh dear! This is truly terrifying! Oh dear, Oh 
dear, in this way, those who lack the oral instruction of a genuine 
spiritual teacher will indeed fall into the great abyss of cyclic 
existen'e and be tortured unbearably by continuous sufferings. 
Rather than this, listen to my words! Understand this instruction 
of mine. I will reveal now an oral instruction which obstructs 
the womb entrances, through the reversal of attachment and the 
reversal of aversion. Listen and understand this well! It is said [in 
the Root Verses of the Six Intermediate States/:~0 
I must obstruct the womb entrances and call to mind the 
methods of reversal. 
This is the time when perseverance and purity of perception 
are imperative. 
I must give up all jealousy and meditate on my spiritual 
teacher with consort. THE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING 
As is described fin the oral instruction] above, if you are to be 
born as a male, you will feel attachment towards the mother and 
aversion towards the father. If you are to be born as a female, you 
will feel attachment to the father and aversion towards the mother. 
Thus you will come to experience jealousy, fa conflict of attach­
ment and aversion}. Specific to this stage, there is a profound oral 
instruction. 0, Child of Buddha Nature, when the feelings of 
attachment and aversion arise, meditate as follows: 'Alas, sentient 
beings such as I, with such negative past actions, have, up until 
now, roamed in cyclic existence. I have continued to wander in this 
way, being driven on by my feelings of attachment and aversion. If, 
especially at this time, I continue to be influenced by attachment 
and aversion, there is a danger that I will roam into the limitlessly 
[diverse} states of cyclic existence and risk sinking into the ocean 
of suffering, for a very long time. Therefore, now, from the very 
beginning, I must not generate attachment or aversion. Oh dear, 
Oh dear! As of now, I shall never again be motivated by attachment 
or auersion.' By concentrating intently on this thought, as it is said 
in the tantras, the womb entrances will be obstructed by this 
[singular intent} alone. 0, Child of Buddha Nature, do not be 
distracted! Concentrate your mind on this thought, with a one­
pointed intention. 
Yet if, even having done this, the womb entrances are still not 
obstructed and [the deceased] draws ever nearer to entering a 
womb, then the womb entrances should be obstructed by giving 
the oral instruction on the unreal and illusion-like nature [of all 
phcnomena].31 
[0, Child of Buddha Nature], meditate in the following way! 
'Alas! The father and the mother fin sexual union], the rain, the 
blackness, the hurricane, the thunderous sound, the fearful and 
terrifying experiences, the nature of these and of all phenomena is 
iJlusion-like. In whatever form [phenomena} arise, they are not 
real. All substantial things are unreal and false, like a mirage. They 
are not permanent. They are not changeless. So what is the purpose 
of my attachment [to these perceptions]? What is the purpose of 
my awe and terror? That which is non-existent, I am seeing as 
existent! I In reality}, all these things [that I perceive} are the per­
ceptions of my own mind. Yet, the essential nature of mind is THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
primordially non-existent, like an illusion. So how is it possible for 
things to exist externally, in their own right? Since I haue not 
understood this before, I haue [always] regarded the non-existent 
as existent. I haue regarded the unreal as real. I haue regarded 
illusions as truth. This is why I haue roamed in cyclic existence for 
such a long time. Now, yet again, if I do not realise that all 
these [phenomena] are illusions, I will continue to roam in cyclic 
existence, interminably, and without doubt, I will drown in a 
swamp of euery manner of suffering. Now, [I must realise that] all 
these {phenomena] are completely deuoid of substantial existence, 
euen for a single instant. fin reality], they are like a dream, like an 
illusion, like an echo, like a celestial .city, like a mirage, like a 
reflection, like an optical illusion, like the moon {reflected] in 
water. It is absolutely certain that these [phenomena] are not truly 
real, but that they are false. Through this singular resolue, I will 
blow apart my apprehension of their true existence. Through utter 
confidence in this {meditation], my apprehension of self-existence 
will be reuersed.' By knowing from the depths of your heart that 
all these {phenomena] are unreal, the womb entrances will certainly 
he obstructed. 
However, if, despite this [teaching! being given, the apprehension 
of true existence is not shattered, and the womb entrances are 
therefore not obstructed and [the deceased] draws ever nearer to 
entering a womb, then there is a lfinall profound oral instruc­
tion: 
0, ·Child of Buddha Nature, if, euen after hauing engaged in the 
aboue {meditation}, the womb entrances haue still not been 
obstructed, now, according to the fifth [profound oral instruction}, 
you must obstruct the womb entrances by meditating on inner 
radiance. 32 The method of meditation is as follows: 'Alas! All 
[seemingly] substantial phenomena are [expressions of] my own 
mind. Yet, fin reality], this mind is of the nature of emptiness, it is 
beyond creation and beyond cessation.' By focusing your thought 
in this way, your mind should [naturally] return to an uncontrived 
and stainless state. Let the mind rest in this, its natural state, 
directly in itself, in the same way, for example, as water is poured 
into water. Let [the mind} rest in its natural flow, clear, uncon­
stricted, uncontrived and relaxed . .n f By following this method] THE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING 293 
you can be sure that the womb entrances to the four modes of 
birth will certainly be obstructed. Meditate again and again in this 
way, until the wonzb entrances are closed. 
Set down above are several profound and genuine instructions for 
effecting the obstruction of the womb entrances. For those with 
high, average or low ability, it is impossible not to be liberated by 
these l instructions]. This is because: first, consciousness in the 
intermediate state is endowed with an, albeit corrupt, supernormal 
cognitive ability. Therefore, whatever one says [to the deceased] is 
heard by the deceased. Second, even if the deceased was deaf or 
blind [while in the human world!, now, [in the intermediate state], 
all the sensory faculties will be complete and therefore whatever is 
said will be apprehended. Third, since the deceased is continuously 
being overwhelmed by fear and terror, there is an undistracted 
concentration on what to do; therefore, what is said will be listened 
to. Fourth, since the consciousness has no [physicalJ support, it is 
easy to guide and it can penetrate to the essence of whatever is 
focused upon. [Additionally], since the power of retention is now 
many times clearer, even the mentally weak will have, in the inter­
mediate state, a lucid awareness, by virtue of their past actions. 
Hence, they will have the gift of knowing how to meditate on 
that which is taught and the gift [to assimilate] such points [of 
instruction]. These are the reasons why the performance of rituals 
on behalf of the dead is beneficial. Indeed, it is extremely important 
to persevere in the reading aloud of this Great Liberation by 
Hearing in the Intermediate States for the entire forty-nine days. 
For if liberation is not achieved at one introduction, it can be 
achieved at another. This is the reason why, not just one, but many 
introductions should be given. 
[CHOOSING A WOMB ENTRANCE] 
-Then again, there are several kinds [of persons] who do not achieve 
liberation, despite having received the above introductions and 
having been taught the above visualisation techniques. This [lack 
of ability 1 comes about through limited familiarity with virtuous 
past actions, extensive primal familiarity with non-virtuous past 
actions, and the potency and great force of negative obscurations. 294 THE TIBETA:>J BOOK Of TilE DEAD 
So, at this stage, if the womb entrances have still not been [success­
fully] obstructed [as described] above, there is a profound oral 
instruction for choosing an [appropriate] womb entrance/' \vhich 
should now be presented. Again, one should request the assistance 
of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, take refuge in [the Three Precious 
Jewels] and cultivate an altruistic intention. Then, as before, calling 
to the deceased by name, three times, one should say the following 
words: 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, (repeat the name of the deceased), 
listen [carefully/. Even though many {authentic/ introductions to 
the instructions haue {Jreviously been giuen to you, up until this 
stage, you haue not taken these to heart. Now, if you h.1z•e been 
unable to obstruct the ummb entrances, the time has actu~zlly come 
for you to assume a body. There are [not just one, but/ sever,lf 
different kinds ofprofowzd [and genuine} instructions which relate 
to your choice of an appropriate womb entrance. So comprehend 
these well. Do not be distracted. f Listen/ without distr.zction! 
Underst.md, and maintain a firm intention! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, now, /if you are to be born as a 
human} the indications and signs which relate to the environ­
ment into which you may be born, on one amongst the /four/ 
continents, will arise. You must recognise these [indications/! 
Indeed, you must choose the continent based on fa carefit! examin­
ation of these/ indications of the enuironment into which you may 
be born. 
If you are to take birth on the Eastern Continent, VideiJLz, you 
will see a lake, adorned by male and female su•.1ns. Do not he 
drawn towards this fpl.Jcej! Call to mind the methods of reuersal 
[and apply these/! For were you to go there, even though it is a 
happy and tranquil place, it is an environment where the /sacred/ 
te,zchings do not flourish. So do not enter /this continent/! 
If you are to take birth on the Southern Continent, j.zmbudL•ipa, 
you zuill see gr.1nd and delightfid m,msions. I{ indeed you can enter 
here, do so! 
If you are to take birth on the Western Continent, Apt'zrago: 
daniya, you will see a lake adorned [around its shores/ by male 
and female horses. Do not be drawn towards this place! C.1ll to 
mind the methods of reuersal [and apply these/! For euen though 
it is a pl.zce of great wealth and [abundant} resources, it is ,m TilE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARII'OG 295 
environment where the [sacred} teachings do not flourish. So do 
not enter [this continent}! 
If you are to take birth on the Northern Continent, Uttarakuru, 
you will see a lake adorned [around its shores} by cattle or a lake 
adorned by trees. Recognise these appearances as indications of 
the birth that you are about to assume! Do not enter there! For 
even though this is a place where there is longevity and which has 
merit, it is an environment where the [sacred] teachings do not 
flourish. So do not enter [this continent/! 
I{ you ~1re to take birth as a god you will see delightful celestial 
palaces, many-storeyed and composed of diverse jewels. If indeed 
you can, you should enter here! 
I{ you are to h1ke birth ,zs an antigod, you will see exquisite 
groves and spinning wooden torches [creating} wheels of fire. Do 
not enter there, under any circumstances! Call to mind the methods 
of reuers,zl[and apply these/! 
If you are to take birth as an aniniLzl, you will see rocky caverns, 
empty hollows ,md straw sheds, shrouded by mist. Do not enter 
there! 
If you are to take birth as an anguished spirit, you will see 
tree-stumps, black protruding silhouettes, blind desolate gorges, 
or total darkness. Were you to go there, you would be born as an 
anguished spirit and experience the manifold sufferings of 
finsati.zblej hunger .. md thirst. Do not enter there! Call to nzind the 
methods of reversal/and apply these]! Be courageous and strong! 
If you are to take birth as a hell being, you will hear the songs 
of those of negative past actions. Or, quite simply, you will feel 
powerless and compelled to enter. \Vhereupon, the perception will 
arise that you are mouing into a land of darkness, where there are 
black and reddened houses, black earth-pits and black roads. Were 
you to be drawn to this place, you would enter the hells, and 
experience the {searing} unbearable sufferings of heat and cold. Be 
c,zrejitl! Do not enter into the midst of this, for there will be no 
opportunity to turn back. Do not enter there, under any circum­
stances! As it is said [in the root verses}: 'You must obstruct the 
womb entrances and call to mind the methods of reversal.' These 
are [wholly] necessary now! 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, although you do not wish to move 
fonoard, you are pozuerless not to do so. The avenging forces, who 
are the executors of the unfailing laws of cause and effect, will be rilE TIBETAN BOOK 01' TilE DEAD 
pursuing you. You will have no choice but to move forward. Before 
you, the avengers and executors will be leading the way. The 
experience will arise of trying to flee from these forces, of trying 
to flee from the darkness, from the most violent windstorms, from 
the [thunderous} tumult, the snow, the rain, the hail and the turbu­
lent blizzards, which swirl around you. [Frightened}, you will set 
off to seek a refuge and you will find protection inside an enclosed 
space, such as within the mansions, just described, or in rock­
shelters, or holes in the ground, or amongst trees, or within the 
bud of a lotus flower. Hiding here, you will be very hesitJnt to 
come out, and you will think: 'I should not leave here now.' You 
will be uery reluctant to be separated from this protected place and 
you will become utterly attached to it. Then, because you are so 
very hesitant to go outside, where you would be confronted by the 
fears and terrors of the intermediate state, you will, because of this 
fear and awe, continue to hide away. Thus, you will assume a 
body, however utterly bad that may be, and you will, fin time}, 
come to experience all manner of sufferings. This [experience of 
wanting to hide] is a sign that you are being obstructed by mal­
ignant forces and carnivorous ogres. Particularly related to this 
stage, there is a profound oral instruction. Listen, therefore, and 
understand! 
At this time, when you are being pursued by auenging forces 
and you feel powerless [to escape} and you are terrified and fright­
ened, you must, in an instant and with perfect recall, vistwlise the 
Transcendent Lord Mahottara Heruka, or Hay~-1griva, or Vajra­
pa1_1i, or else, if you have one, your personal meditational deity. 
[Visualise the deity/ as having a huge buddha-body, with thick 
limbs, standing upright, in a terrifying wrathful nwni{estation, 
which pulverises el'ery form of obstructing force. [By virtue of 
this practice}, insulated from the avengers by the blessing and 
compassion [of the nzeditational deity/, you will secure the ability 
to choose a womb entrance. This is a profound and genuine crucial 
point of the oral instructions. So, understand this now! 
Moreover, 0, Child of Buddha Nature, the gods {inhabiting the 
form realms} of meditative concentration, and similar beings {of 
the higher re,lfmsj, take birth through the potency o{ their medit,lt­
il'e stability. H Also, certain classes of malevolent forces, including 
the anguished spirits, arise on the basis of the transformation of 
their mental body itself during this very [intermediate state], TilE GREAT LIBERATION BY HEARING 297 
through a shift in their mode of perception. [In this way], they 
assume the forms of an anguished spirit, malign force or carnivor­
ous ogre, capable of displaying diverse miraculous acts. The 
anguished spirits who reside in the ocean depths, the anguished 
spirits who move through space, the eighty thousand classes of 
obstructing forces, and so forth, all come into existence consequent 
on such a shift in their mode of perception, while [still] in the 
mental body. 
At this time, therefore, [while visualising the wrathful deity] it 
is essential that you hold in mind the meaning of emptiness, [the 
essence of/ the Great Seal. If you are not able to practise in this 
way, you must cultivate your experience of the illusion-like natural 
expressive power [of actual reality]. If you are unable even to 
practise in that way, you should meditate on the meditational 
deity Mahakaru1Jika, without allowing your mind to experience 
attachment, in any respect whatsoever. Through [practising this 
effectively], buddhahood will be attained in the Buddha-body of 
Perfect Resource, during this intermediate state. 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if, due to the potency of your past 
actions, you must at this stage enter a womb, a further teaching 
on the methods of choosing a womb entrance is now to be taught. 
Listen, [carefully}, therefore! Do not just move towards whatever 
womb entrance appears to you. If, whilst being pursued by the 
avenging forces [of the laws of cause and effect}, you are powerless 
[and unable to resist} the process of entering [a womb], then you 
must, at this time, meditate on Hayagriva. Since you now possess 
a subtle supernormal cognitive ability, you will [clearly} apprehend 
all the [potential] birthplaces as they arise, in sequence. Therefore, 
make your choice, [based on the examination of the indications and 
based on the instructions J! There are two kinds of oral instruction 
[which can now be applied]: [first}, the oral instructions for trans­
ferring the consciousness to the pure buddha fields36 and [second}, 
the instructions for choosing a womb entrance within impure cyclic 
existence. Therefore, [listen carefully and] do as follows: 
First, the transference of consciousness to the utterly pure realms 
of the sky-farers is effected by those of highest ability, by directing 
their intention as follows. 'Alas! I am deeply sad that even after 
an infinite "incalculable aeon", I am still left behind in this 
swamp of cyclic existence. How dreadful it is, that while so many 
have attained buddhahood in the past, I have still not achieved THE TIBETA:-o; BOOK OF THE DEAD 
liberation. Now, this cycle of existence disgusts me! It horrifies 
me! I haue long been led astray by it! Now, the moment approaches 
for me to move forward! Now, I must take birth, miraculously, in 
the bud of a lotus flower, in the presence of the Buddha Amitabha, 
in the western Buddha field of the Blissful (Sukhavati)!' Focus your 
intention, concentratedly, on this thought! {It is essential that you 
make this effort!/ Alternatively, you can focus your intention on 
whichever buddha field you wish. On Manifest joy (Abhirati), on 
Dense Array ( Ghanauyuha), on Alakavatf, on Mount Pottllaka, or 
{you may wish to focus] on coming into the presence of {Padmas­
ambhaua of] 04£/iytlna, in the celestial palace of Lotus Light, or 
indeed on whichever buddha field you wish to enter. He single­
minded! Do not be distracted! Immediately upon establishing {this 
intention}, you will take birth in the {chosen/ buddha field. Yet 
again, alternatively, if you wish to proceed into the presence of 
Maitreya in {the realm of/ The joyful (Tu~ita), think as follows: 
'At this juncture in the intermediate state, the moment has come 
for me to proceed into the presence of the king of the {sacred] 
teachings, Maitreya, in {the realm of/ The joy{ul. There{ore, it is 
there that I will go!' If you focus your intention on this thought, 
you will take birth, miraculously, in the heurt of a lotus, in the 
presence of Maitreya. 
Alternatiuely, if you are unable to accomplish this ftrans{erencej, 
or i{ you desire to enter a womb or you are obliged to enter one, 
then there are the {allowing instructions on choosing a womb 
entrance within impure cyclic existence. Therefore, listen fcare­
{ullyj. Utilising the supernormal cognitive ability which you now 
possess, examine the continents once again, as just described, and 
make your choice. You must enter a land where the {sacred/ teach­
ings flourish! 
/He warned, however! J It could be that, fin reality}, you are 
about to take birth, by entering into a substance which is {etid and 
polluted, and yet that filthy mass will be perceiued by you as 
sweet-smelling and you will be drawn towards it and take birth 
within it. Therefore, whatever such {attractive/ appearances may 
arise, do not grasp at them as substantially real! Ensure that you 
remuin utterly {ree {rom the symptoms of attachment and aversion, 
and on that basis choose an excellent womb entrance. 
It is extremely important that your motivation is firmly concen­
tr~.lfed f.zs you approach the womb entrance]. Therefore think as TIll:. (i R 1:.:\ T L II\ E It AT I 0 :-; BY II EAR IN G 299 
follows: 'Ah! For the sake of all sentient beings, I shall be born as 
a zmiuersal monarch, or [acting purely] like a great [dignified] sal 
tree, I shall be born i1lto the brahman class, or as the child of 
an accomplished master, or into a family which maintains an 
immaculate lineaf(e of the [sacred/ teachings, or into a family where 
the mother and father are deeply devout. Then, once I have taken 
on a body which is blessed with the merit of being able to act on 
behalf of all sentient beings, I shall [dedicate myself to] acting on 
their behalf!' You must concentrate your motivation on this 
thought and {thus/ enter the womb. 
As you enter the womb, consecrate it [by perceiving it] as a 
celestial p~.1lace of the deities.>~ Be full of deuotion. Ensure that 
you enter whilst pr~.1ying to and inZLlgining that you are receiving 
empowerments from the conquerors of the ten directions and from 
their 50115, as well as from the meditational deities and, in particu­
lar, from M,lhdk.Zrw.zika. 
f However be warned], for as you make this choice of a womb 
entrance, there is a risk of error. There is the risk of error when, 
through the potency of past actions, an excellent womb entrance 
is perceiued as a bad one, and when a bad womb entrance is 
perceiued as a good one. At this time, the essential points of the 
teaching are crucial. Therefore, mzce again, you should act as 
follou.!s. Euen though perceptions of an excellent [womb entrance] 
nz~.1y occur, do not become attached to these. And [conversely] 
even though perceptions of a poor [womb entrance} may occur, 
do not feel aversion. The essential point of the profound and 
genuine [instructions] is that you enter the womb in a state of great 
equanimity, utterly free from {the dichotomies of} good and bad, 
acceptance mzd rejection, or attachment and aversion. 
Nevertheless, with the exception of certain persons who have 
experience of this !equanimity] it is difficult [for beings] to sever 
themselves from the deep-seated and long-lasting disease of nega­
tive habitual tendencies. Therefore, if [the deceased] remains 
unable to be free from attachment and aversion, in the above 
manner, such negative beings who are of the lowest capacity may 
seek refuge in the animal realms or similar [kinds of inferior exist­
ences]. In order to counteract this, again calling to the deceased by 
name, you should speak as follows: 300 rHE TIBETA:-1 BOOK OF THE DEAD 
0, Child of Buddha Nature, if you do not know how to choose a 
womb entrance and you are unable to give up your attachment 
and your aversion, then, regardless of which of the above appear­
ances arise, you must call out, by name, to the Three Precious 
Jewels. Tdke refuge in them! Pray to MahakJrw.zika! Go forward 
with your head held high. Recognise that this is the intermedi.zte 
state! Give up your attachment and your clinging to the friends, 
suns, daughters and relatives that you have left behind. These 
{attachments} are not helpful [to you now/. Enter into the blue 
light of the human realnz. Enter into the white light of the realm 
of the gods. Enter into the mansions of precious jewels and the 
gardens of delight. 
This [introduction I should be enunciated up to seven times. Then 
one should pray to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, [reciting the 
Aspirational Prayer Calling to the Buddhas and Bodhisattuas for 
Assistmzce] .. lx Then one should read aloud, up to seven times, the 
Aspirational Prayer which Protects from Fear of the Intermediate 
States, the Root Verses of the [Six/ Intermediate States, and the 
Aspiraticmal Prayer which Rescues from the Dangerous Pathwuys 
of the Intermediate States. 39 Then, one should also read aloud, 
clearly and with correct pronunciation, the Liberation by Wearing: 
Natural Liberation of the Psycho-physical Aggregates. And you 
should also read aloud the Spiritual Practice: Natural Liberation 
of Habitual Tendencies.'~0 
CONCLUSION 
Thus, [in summary], by acting correctly, yogins with high realis­
ation will r successfully j effect the transference of consciousness at 
the moment of death, and, being spared the necessity of having to 
wander through the intermediate states, will attain liberation in 
an ascending and core-penetrating manner. Certain others, below 
these I yogins in ability], who have achieved [direct] medit<Hive 
experience, will recognise the inner radiance of reality, at the eul­
mination of the intermediate state of the time of death, [and will, 
similarly, attain buddhahood] in an ascending and core­
penetrating manner. Others, below these, in accord with their 
inheritance of past actions and their particular level of ability, TilE <;HI:-.AT LIIH:RATIO:-.i BY HE:\RI:-.iG 301 
will attain liberation at one [moment] or at another, during the 
[respective] weeks [which follow the moment of death], as the 
visions of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities gradually arise in the 
intermediate state of reality. Since there is a succession of danger­
ous passageways, recognition will occur at an appropriate juncture 
[during the intermediate state of reality] and liberation will follow. 
Ho\vever, those who have a very weak inheritance of [positive] 
past actions, those who are greatly clouded by negative obscuration 
and those who arc burdened by the most non-virtuous past actions, 
will be obliged to roam downwards into the intermediate state of 
rebirth. Here, as before, since there are different levels of introduc­
tion, like the rungs of a ladder, recognition will occur, if not at 
one stage, then at another; and thereby liberation will follow. 
But if those, just mentioned, who have a weak inheritance of 
[positive] past actions, do nor achieve recognition and arc accord­
ingly overcome by fear and terror, then, there is a graded series of 
different forms of instruction [for obstructing, and] for choosing, 
the womb entrance. Thus, if recognition does not occur in the 
course of one such teaching, then, these individuals will be intro­
duced to yet another [instruction] and upon understanding the 
[appropriate] visualisation technique they will achieve the inesti­
mable bounty of the higher existences. Even if one is, like a beast, 
the lowest of the low, through the munificence of taking refuge, 
one will avoid birth in inferior existences and assume a precious 
human body, [blessed] with the benefits of freedom and favourable 
opportunities. Then, in the life to come, one will meet a spiritual 
reacher or spiritual friend, and one will receive the teachings, and 
thereby liberation will follow. 
This [sacred] teaching, when encountered in the intermediate 
state of rebirth, is an [oral] instruction that connects [the deceased] 
with their residual inheritance of virtuous past actions. This is why 
it [is said to] resemble a connecting tube which [re-establishes 
continuity I when inserted into a broken water channel. Therefore, 
(based on the veracity of this method], it is impossible not to be 
liberated upon hearing this reaching, even for those of the greatest 
negativity. This is because, during the intermediate stares, both 
the compassionate invitation of all the [Peaceful and Wrathful] 
Conquerors and the invitation of the manifestations of the malev­
olent and obstacle-causing forces arise simultaneously. As this 
occurs, merely by hearing this [sacred] teaching, the mode of _)02 TilE IIBETAI'O BOOK OF THE DLAD 
pen:eption [of the deceased] is transformed and liberation is 
thereby attained. 
Further, this transformation is easy to effect because [the 
deceased] now possesses a [subtle] mental body and not a body of 
flesh and blood; the deceased continues to see and hear, with a 
subtle supernormal cognitive ability based on the potency of past 
actions, however far he or she has wandered into the intermediate 
states. [Thus], by sustaining mindfulness [of the teaching], the 
deceased is capable of transforming his or her perception in an 
instant. This is why [the reminder of the reaching] is extremely 
beneficial. Its impact is like that of a catapult machine; in other 
words, it resembles the way in which ~huge tree-trunk, incapable 
of being lifted by a hundred men, can be easily steered wherever 
one wants in a moment, when it is floated in WJtcr. [In essence, 
the impact of hearing this doctrine I resembles the turning of a 
horse by its bridle. 
All those who have died should be approached in the manner 
[here described]. If the corpse is present, then a friend should sit 
dose to it and repeatedly read aloud this succinct reminder. This 
reading should continue [ar least] until blood and serum emerge 
from the nostrils [of the deceased]; and until then, the corpse must 
nor be disturbed. 
The commitments which relate to this practice are ~1s follows: 
no living creatures should be killed in dedication to the dead 
person; relatives and friends, whether oneself or others, should nor 
cry, shout, mourn or wail in the presence of the corpse; and instead 
should engage in as much virtuous activity as possible. 
Further, it would be extremely beneficial if this [sacred] teaching 
of the Gre,lt Liberation hy Hearing in the l11termcdiate States is 
recited as a complement to [other systems of] meditative guidJnce, 
irrespective of the category of the [sacred I teachings to which they 
belong. 
Further, this text should he recited constJ.ntly. Its words and 
meaning should be learnt by heart. Then, if one's health permits, 
when r the onset of] the intermediate state of the time of death 
becomes certain, and the signs of [approaching] death are re('og­
nised, one should read this text aloud to oneself, and reflect on its 
words and mec.ming. If one's health docs not allow this, then entrust 
the book to a fellow Buddhist for him or her to read aloud. The THl: GREAT LIBERATIO:-. BY HF.ARll':G 3°3 
reminder thus being made, there is no doubt that liberation will 
assuredly be attained. 
This teaching, which does not necessarily require [prior] medi­
tation practice, is the profound instruction which liberates by being 
seen, liberates by being heard and liberates by being read aloud. 
This profound instruction is one which can lead even those of the 
greatest negativity on the direct path [to liberation]. Ensure that 
irs words and meaning are retained in the memory (such that] they 
are not forgotten, even if you were to be chased by seven [ferocious] 
dogs. This is a pith instruction for the attainment of buddhahood 
at the time of death. [Even if] all the buddhas of the past, present 
and future [were to search], they would not find a [sacred] teaching 
superior to this. 
This completes the instruction on the intermediate state, which 
liberates corporeal beings, the profound, refined essence, entitled 
the Great Liberation by Hearing in the Intermediate States. It was 
brought forth from the mountain of Gampodar by the accom­
plished master Karma lingpa, as a precious treasure. 
MANGALA.\1! 12 
Aspirational Prayers CONTEXT 
If possible, the dying person should recite these three aspirational 
prayers with intense longing at the time of death. 
Otherwise, the attending lama should recite these prayers, also 
with intense longing, immediately before the Liberation by Hearing 
(Chapter 11) is read to the dying person. That is, following the taking 
of refuge in the Three Precious Jewels -the Buddha, the sacred 
teachings and the monastic community -and the making of 
offerings. 
At this time, when it is likely that the dying person's consciousness 
is dimmed and the dying person may be feeling afraid, it is regarded 
as crucially important for the dying person to place their confidence 
in the buddhas and bodhisattvas and to request the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas to be their refuge and guide. Herein is contained the Aspirational Prayer [Calling] to the 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas for Assistance.1 
I bow down to the Peaceful and Wrathful Conquerors! 
This prayer should be recited at the time of one's own death, 
[or whenever appropriate]. First, make offerings, both actual and 
visualised, to the Three Precious Jewels. Then, while holding fra­
grant incense in one's hand, say the following words with fervent 
intensity: 
0, buddhas and bodhisattvas, abiding in the ten directions, refuge 
of living beings, imbued with compassion, imbued with know­
ledge. imbued with clcur vision and imbued with love, come to 
this place, by the power of your compassion and accept these 
displuyed and visualised offerings! 0, Compassionute Ones, as 
you are the fountain of all-knowing pristine cognition, of loving 
compassion, of effectiue actiuity, and of a power to grant refuge, 
beyond conception, {come to this place!} 
0, Compassionate Ones, this human being, (say the name), is 
leaving this world and journeying to another shore. He2 is being 
cast off from this world and approaching the great transition of 
death. Suffering deeply, he is without a friend, without a refuge, 
without a protector and without a companion. His perception of 
this life is fading away. He is moving on to unother world, entering 
a dense darkness and {a/ling into an unfathomable abyss. Entriing 
the thick forest of doubt, he will be driven on by the potency of 
past uctions. He will be entering a great wilderness, bonze away 
on a gre~.zt ocean, and driuen on by the vital winds of past actions. 
He will be moving in a direction where there is no finn ground, ASI'IRATIONAL PRAYERS 
entering a great battlefield, being seized by gredt malevolent forces 
and becommg ouerwhelmed by fear and terror upon meeting the 
executors of the unfailing laws of cause and effect. In accord with 
his past actions, powerless {to resist}, he may euen, yet ag~.zin, be 
entering the realms of rebirth. The time has come when he has no 
choice hut to move on, alone, leaving his dear friends behind. 
0, Compassionate Ones, grant refuge now to this person (say 
the name), who has no refuge! Protect him! Be his companion! 
Defend him from the great darkness of the intermediate state! 
Turn back the gre~.lt.lmrricane of past actions! Protect him from 
the great fear and terror of the unfailing latus of cause and effect! 
Rescue him from the long and d~.mgerous pathways of the inter­
mediate st.lte! 0, Compassionate Ones, be unsparing in your com­
passion! Grant assistance to him! Do not allow him to be expelled 
into the three kinds of inferior existence. \'(lithout zuavering from 
your ancient vows, swiji/y release the power of your compassion. 
0, buddhas and bodhisattuas, for the sake of this person (say the 
name), be unsparing in your comp,zssion, skilful means and ability! 
Seize him with your compassion! Do not allow {this} sentient being 
to j~lil under the power of negative past actions! 0, Three Precious 
jewels, protect us from the sufferings of the intermediate state! 
This Aspirational Prayer {Calling/ to the Buddhas and Bodhis­
attuas for Assistance should be read aloud with intense devotion 
three times, by oneself and by all others present. ~~lay its impact 
not cease until cyclic existence has been emptied! 
SAMA Y A rgya rgya rgy~.z! Let good auspices prevail! Herein is contained the Aspirational Prayer which Rescues from 
the Dangerous Pathways of the Intermediate States.3 
I bow down to the spiritual teachers, fmeditational deities] and 
tjakinis, 
May I be guided on the path by their great love. 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven] by deep-seated 
bewilderment, 
May the spiritual teachers, holders of the ora/lineages, draw 
me forward, 
Leading me on the path of [radiant] light, 
Which is undistracted study, reflection and meditation. 
May the supreme consorts, the hosts of tf.akinis, support me 
from behind, 
And thus [encircled] may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven] by deep-seated 
delusion, 
May the transcendent lord Vairocana draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of reality's expanse. 
May the supreme consort [Akasa]dhatvisvari support me from 
behind, 
And thus [encircled} may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 4 ASPIRATIONAL PRAYERS 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven] by deep-seated 
avers ton, 
May the transcendent lord Vajrasattva draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the mirror-like pristine cognition. 
May the supreme consort Buddhalocana support me from 
behind, 
And thus [encircled] may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. JII 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven} by deep-seated pride, 
Niay the transcendent lord Ratnasambhava draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of sameness. 
May the supreme consort Mamaki support me from behind, 
And thus [encircled] may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven} by deep-seated 
attachment, 
May the transcendent lord Amitabha draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of discernment. 
May the supreme consort PatJcfaravasini support me from 
behind, 
And thus [encircled] may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven] by deep-seated envy, 
May the transcendent lord Amoghasiddhi draw me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is the pristine cognition of accomplishment. 
May the supreme consort Samayatara support me from 
behind, 
And thus [encircled] may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
0, as I roam in cyclic existence [driven} by the five virulent 
poisons, 
May the transcendent conquerors, [the male buddhasj of the 
five enlightened families, draw me forward, 
teading me on the p,lth of radiant light, 
Which is the four pristine cognitions combined. 
May the five supreme female buddhas, [the purity of} the 
exfhmse, support me from behind, 
And, thus [encircled/, may I be rescued 
From the light-paths of the six impure classes [of beings/ 
And be escorted to the five utterly supreme and pure buddha 
fields. 
0, as 1 roam in cyclic existence driven by deep-seated habitual 
tendendcs, 
May the assembly of spiritual heroes and awareness holders 
dr,lll/ me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
\'\lhich is the coemergent pristine cognition. 
May the supreme consorts, the hosts of qakini, support me 
from behind, 
And thus [encircled} may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
And be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 
0, as 1 roam in cyclic existence dl'iven by deep-seated 
betuildering perceptions, 
M,zy the assembly of Blood-drinking Wrath/it! Deities draw 
me forward, 
Leading me on the path of radiant light, 
Which is {ree of fear and terrif:ving perceptions. 
May the assembly o{ the Krodhesv,lrf, Queens of the Expanse, 
support me from behind, 
And thus fencircledj may I be rescued 
From the fearsome passageway of the intermediate state, 
A11d be escorted to the level of an utterly perfect buddha. 
{o.~t .·llj HU.~tj' 
i\L.ly the elements of space not arise as a hostile force. 
M~.ly 1 see them as the field of the blue buddha. ASPIRATIO:-;AL PRAYERS 
May the elements of water not arise as a hostile force. 
May I see them as the field of the white buddha. 
May the elements of earth not arise as a hostile force. 
1\1ay I see them as the field of the yellow buddha. 
May the elements of fire not arise as a hostile force. 
May I see them as the field of the red buddha. 
1\1ay the elements of wind not arise as a hostile force. 
1\1ay I see them as the field of the green buddha. 
1\1ay the [awesome] sounds, lights and rays not arise as a 
hostile force. 
May I see them as the infinite fields of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities. 
May the rainbow-coloured elements not rise up as a hostile 
force. 
May I see them as the fields of the manifold buddhas. 
1\1ay I recognise all sounds as my own sounds. 
May I recognise all lights as my own lights. 
May I recognise all rays as my own rays. 
May I spontaneously recognise [the characteristics of] the 
intermediate st,ztes. 
May the fields of the three buddha-bodies be manifest. 
SA~1AYA! 313 Herein is contained the Aspirational Prayer which Protects from 
Fear of the Intermediate States.6 
When my life's course is ended, 
And I roam alone in the intermediate states, 
The loved ones of this world can no longer help me. 
So, fat this critical time/, may the Conquerors, the Peaceful 
and Wrathful Deities, 
[Quickly/ release the power of their compassion, 
And may the deep darkness of my ignorance be dispelled. 
When I roam alone, separated from my loved ones, 
And [myriad] images of emptiness arise, naturally 
manifesting, 
May the buddhas [quickly] release the power of their 
compassion, 
And may the fear of the awesome and terrifying intermediate 
states be annulled. 
When the five radiant lights of pristine cognition dawn, 
May I recognise them as my own [nature}, without awe and 
without terror, 
And as the [manifold] forms of the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities arise, 
May I be fearlessly confident and recognise [the characteristics 
off the intermediate states. 
\Y/hen 1 experience suffering, as the result of negative past 
adions, 
ML1y the Great Compassionate One dispel all such misery, ASPII{ATIO:SAL Pl{AYERS 
And as the natural sound of reality reverberates like a 
thousand peals of thunder, 
lvfay all sounds be heard as the teachings of the Greater 
Vehicle. 
When I am driven on by past actions, unable to find a refuge, 
May the meditational deities dispel all such misery, 
And as I experience the suffering of habitual tendencies and 
past actions, 
May the meditative stabilities of inner radiance and bliss 
[naturally] arise. 7 
When I am miraculously born into the intermediate state of 
rebirth, 
May /not be beguiled by the perverse prophecies of Mara, 8 
And as I /freely] arrive at every place that I think of, 
A1.zy the bewildering fear and terror, generated by my negative 
past actions, not arise. 
\Vhen the roars of savage wild beasts echo around me, 
May their cries be transformed into the sound of the sacred 
teachings, the Six Syllables, 
And as I am engulfed by snow, rain, wind and darkness, 
May I achieve the pure clairvoyance of radiant pristine 
cognition. 
May sentient beings in the intermediate state, similar in kind to 
myself, 
Be born into the higher realms, free from rivalry, 
And as severe dissonant mental states generate insatiable 
hunger and thirst, 
May the afflictions of hunger, thirst, heat and cold, be 
annulled. 
When I see my future parents in union, 
May I perceive them as Mahakarm.zika and consort, 
And for the sake of others, being blessed with the power to 
choose a birthplace, 
May I achieve an exalted body, adorned with the auspicious 
major and minor marks. 316 THE TIBETAN BOOK Or THE DEAD 
Once I have achieved birth in a supreme human form, 
May I act so as to swiftly liberate all who see and hear me. 
And may I not be influenced by my negative past actions, 
But multiply and emulate my past merits. 
Wherever I may be born, in whatever land it may be, 
May I quickly encounter the meditational deity of my past 
lives. 
Knowing, from immediately after birth, how to speak and 
walk, 
May I remember my past lives and attain the power of 
non-forgetfulness. 
May I easily come to master by study and reflection, 
The manifold stages of learning -small, intermediate and great. 
May the country into which I am born be auspicious, 
And may all sentient beings be blessed with happiness. 
0, Peaceful and Wrathful Conquerors, may I and all others 
Become entirely at one with you, and come to resemble you, 
In all your forms, your retinues, your lifespan and your 
buddha fields, 
And in every quality of your supreme auspicious marks. 
Through the compassion of Samantabhadra and the infinite 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 
By the power of the truth of pure reality, 
And by the blessing of the mantrins who practise one­
pointedly, 
May [every wish off this aspirational prayer be fulfilled. 
This prayer entitled the Aspirational Prayer which Protects from 
Fear of the Intermediate States was composed by the preceptor 
from 099iyana, Padmakara. May this profound sacred teaching 
not be extinguished until all the worlds of cyclic existence have 
been emptied. 
SAMA Y A rgya rgya rgya! 
This is a treasure-text of Tulku Karma Lingpa. 13 
A Masked Drama of Rebirth CONTEXT 
This allegorical play portrays the experiences of the archetypal evil­
doer Lak~anaraka and the archetypal virtuous householder Srrjata as 
they meet with Yama, the embodiment of the inexorable laws of 
cause and effect, in the intermediate state of rebirth. This lighthearted 
masked drama is still commonly performed today during public 
ceremonial occasions throughout Tibet, Bhutan and the Buddhist 
regions of the Himalayas. The play is staged, often to huge audiences, 
in the courtyards or public ceremonial areas of a monastery, often at 
the time of the annual 1oth day sacred dances commemorating the 
life of Padmasambhava. PART ONE 
Herein is contained [a masked dranu cntirledJ N.ztur,z/ Liber.llion 
of the Intermediate State o{ Rebirth: A Teaching Reveuling the 
Natural Expression of Virtue and Negativity, in the intermediate 
Stute o{ Rebirth; 1 which is an extract from the Peac:efitl .md \\'ruth­
ful Deities: A Pro{uwrd Sacred Teaching [entitled/ Sutur,z/ Libera­
tion through [Recognition off Lnlightened lntolfi(m.2 
I respectfully bow down to the uncreatcd Buddha-body of 
Reality: 
Samantabhadra and Samantabhadri in union; 
To the unceasing Buddha-body of Perfect Resource: 
The Peaceful and Wrathful Lotus Deities; 
And to the naturally arising Buddha-body of Emanation: 
Padmakara. 
May [all beings! be liberated in the intermediate state! 
Having earlier presented the empowermenrs and introductions 
From the Liheration by He .. zring in the hrtermedi,zte States, An 
extract from the Peaceful and Wr,zthful Lotus Deities, 1 
And having introduced the intermediate state of reality, which 
is the 'great liberation by secing',4 
Now I will present [a means of demonstrating! the 
introduction to the intermediate state of rebirth.' 
THE SCENE 
Here, hauing completed the preuious introductions [to the inter­
mcdi,Jte Stutes of the time of deuth and re,zlityj, 1 will present [in 
the form of a musked dr,mr.zj the introduction to the intermedi,zte 
state o{ rebirth. The spirituul teacher [should 110w appe,Jr fully MASKED Di{AMA J2l 
attired} in the costume of Yama Dharmardja, and wear a large 
wrathful mask, depicting Yama. He is carrying a large wooden 
slate in his right hand, and in his left he holds a large round mirror. 
Dressed in a silk brocade gown, he is seated on a great throne. In 
his retinue, there is a figure dressed as the black Ox-headed Rak~a 
Demon, 6 wearing an ox-head mask and holding a black lasso. 
Then, seated to the right, there is another figure dressed as the 
Monkey-headed Elemental Spirit/ with the face of a monkey, and 
holding a weight and measure in his hands. 8 Other· figures also 
present include: one dressed as the Boar-headed Cemetery Spirit/ 
carrying a wooden slate; one dressed as the venonwus Snake­
headed Demon, 10 with the face of a snake and carrying a mirror; 
one dressed as the ferocious Bear-headed figure, 11 with the face 
of a bear and holding a bellows; one dressed as the awesome 
Lion-headed figure, 11 with the face of a lion and clutching a ham­
mer; and one dressed as the Garucfa-headed Bird figure, 11 with the 
face of a ganuj.a and holding a saw. These figures with diverse 
{animalj-heads who are attired similarly to Yama, are dignified 
and standing in rows, to the right and left of Dharmariija. 
The deity representing {the deceased's} good conscience14 is 
wearing a white peaceful mask and a white silk robe, and is carry­
ing a bowl filled with white pebbles. The demon representing {the 
deceased's! bad conscience15 is wearing a black wrathful mask and 
a black gown, and is carrying a bowl filled with black pebbles. 
Before Dharmaraja, on the right, is a long white carpet, which is 
rolled out like a white pathway, and at its end are two figures 
dressed in the costume of Mahdkaru1Jika, with one face and four 
arms, and bedecked with ornaments. They are seated at the end 
[of the white carpet/ on a throne which is hidden by a curtain. On 
the left side is a long black carpet, which is rolled out like a black 
pathw,zy, and it leads to the door of a dark room. 
Hidden elsewhere, in his home, is a person named the late Srijdta 
{'gloriously born');1b while hidden sornewhere in the corner [of the 
stage], is someone named the late Lak~andraka {'hundred thousand 
hells'}, 17 who is a wrongdoing outcaste1s of low birth. _)22 TilE TIBI-.TAN BOOK OF Till: DEAD 
ACT ONE 
DHARMARAJA (as he draws a cross 011 the wooden slate): 0! 
Ox-headed Rak~a, it seems the time of death has come for a person 
in their home in the human world; the indication of this has 
appeared on my wooden slate. 
OX-HEADED RAK~A (calling to the venomous Snake-headed 
Demon): 0, Venomous Snake-headed One! Look in your mirror! 
\XIhat is this deceased person's country? What is his family line? 
And what is his name? Please look! 
VENOMOUS SNAKE-HEADED DEMON: 0! The deceased whose 
time has come is from the country of Tamradvipa in India, and he 
lived in the city of Santikala, which is a township of butchers. As 
for his family line, he belonged to the lowest social class of the 
four classes;19 and his name is the wrongdoing Lak~anaraka. His 
lifespan has come to an end, and [thus an indication of this I has 
appeared on the wooden slate. Now, go fand fetch him]! 
(Thereupon, the Ox-headed Rak~a. the Boar-headed Cemetery 
Spirit, and the demon representing [the deceased's! bad conscience 
run off, tl/hile, in their wake, the deity representin~ [the dece,lsed'sj 
good conscience rushes to his assistunce. As soon as they haue 
found the 'wrongdoing one' in his house in the human world. they 
tie a black noose around his neck, and then Ox-headed f Rak~a/ 
and Boar-headed Cemetery Spirit both lead him away by the hands. 
The demon representing {the deceased's! bad conscience chases 
him from behind, carrying a load of black pebbles. Meunwhile, 
the deity representing [the deceased's! good conscience places {a 
mere/ six white pebbles in the bowl for white pebbles, and, in 
embarrassment, tries to help. Holding a white scarf, with his hunds 
folded in a gesture of supplication, he attempts to petition Ox­
headed Rak~a {on behalf of the deceased/, but this is unsuccessful. 
Lak~andraka is then brought screaming into the presence of 
[Dharma-/raja.) 
DHARMARAJA (interrogates him): Hmm! \X'ho are you, you 
bbck human being, carrying a weight and measure? Where are 
you from? Why do you not dare to look at me directly? You appear 
to have attained a human form, but what portion of your positive 
virtu<: is [nowJieft? Have you ever had any scruples about commit-~~ A S K E D D H A l\1 A 
ring negative actions? What do you have to say about this? Speak 
quickly now! 
THE WRONGDOI:--IG ONE (LAK~ANARAKAj (lamenting/y): Alas! 
Alas! Permit me to speak in the presence of Yama Dharmaraja! I 
had an ordinary human form, my resources were few, my food 
and clothing poor. I have had many female dependants and thus 
little to eat. I had to take the lives of many beings and many years 
have passed since I ate rice, for I had nothing but warm [freshly 
slain! meat to cat. i\1any years have passed since I drank rice wine 
or pure liquor; for when thirsty I had to drink water and blood. 
Nowadays in the populated areas of the world there arc many 
who claim to be spiritual friends. They frequently teach about the 
defects of having committed negative actions and the benefits of 
having carried out positive actions. However, I did not go to them! 
Also, everyone would say, 'Don't persist in such negative actions, 
as one day death will come, and at that time you will go to the 
hells. You should renounce wrongdoing and perform virtuous 
actions!' 
Even though they advised me by saying these things, I thought, 
'I don't know whether I believe in the hells or not, and anyway 
there is no one who says they have been there, and then returned 
[to prove it].' So, I said to those people, 'Who has gone to the hells 
and then returned? If the hells exist, where arc they? These arc just 
the lies of clever-talking people. Under the ground, there is just 
solid earth and solid rock. There arc no hells. Above, there is only 
empty sky. There are no buddhas. So now while I'm alive, if I kill 
for my food, it doesn't matter. When I die, my body will be taken 
to the charnel ground and it will be eaten by birds and wild 
animals. Not a trace will be left. My mind will vanish, so at that 
time who will be left to go to the hells.-211 HA! HA!' 
So I did not believe in the hells and I committed negative acts. 
And I thought, 'Even if the hells do exist, they will only be set in 
some remote future life, so if I have sufficient food and clothing 
for now, the next life doesn't seem to rna tter.' So it was through 
this misunderstanding, this lack of awareness, and stupidity that I 
committed evil acts. It happened because I was not acquainted 
with the fact that you, Dharmaraja, [you] Ox-headed Rak~a and 
[all you] others, actually exist. I did not knowingly do evil just out 
of contempt for all of you, who exist here in the world of the 
intermediate state. The fault lies with this misunderstanding and TilE TIBETAN BOOK 01:' THE DEAD 
lack of awareness. So, now, all of you, lord and entourage, I 
request you not to pass judgement upon me. If I had known when 
I lived in the human world that this all actually existed, I would 
never have committed negative actions. Now I am stuck here under 
the influence of negative mental states. Alas! Alas!, since you are 
a King of Dharma, be merciful to me! Be my friend and supporter! 
Underground there exists great suffering, Dharmaraja, so do not 
send me down there! Instead, please send me upward into the 
human world! Thereafter I will never perform evil actions again­
only good ones! 
THE DEITY REPRESENTING THE GOOD CONSCIENCE (offering 
a white silk scarf): 0! Dharmaraja, listen to me! This outcaste 
butcher from Tamradvipa has committed evil deeds owing to his 
delusion and blinding ignorance, as a result of which he did not 
understand [the difference between] good and bad actions. Since 
he did not act knowingly or with understanding, I therefore 
petition you not to punish him. He has, after all, also carried out 
a small number of virtuous actions! 
Once when six people were unable to escape from the current 
of a broad river, he saved all six -with a virtuous intent. As a 
mark of this, I have six white pebbles. And since there are also 
other virtuous actions, similar to this, which he has incidentally 
accumulated, Great Dharmaraja, I request your forgiveness on his 
behalf. (As he says this, he prostrates three times [before Dhar­
maraja].) 
THE BLACK DEMON [REPRESENTING THE BAD CONSCIENCEl: 
HA, HA! Is this all you have to say, white deity [of good conscience]! 
Are you not embarrassed to carry this [almost] empty bowl! He, 
this low-caste butcher, has spent his life in evil deeds and has 
robbed himself of his share of virtue. 
He has slain all the animals he has ever seen. 
He has taken warm flesh for food, 
And he has drunk warm blood as a beverage. 
He has continuously spoken harshly [towards others]. 
In the upper valleys he has slain innocent wildlife; 
In the lower valleys he has slain innocent fish; 
And in between he has beaten innocent beggars. 
He has defamed each and every spiritual teacher, 
Burnt down a large temple, .\tASKED DRA.\tA 
Polluted a great lake with poison, 
Burnt a vast mountain forest, 
Beaten his parents, and destroyed a sacred reliquary. 
Now in Tamradvipa, India, 
There is no greater wrongdoer than he! 
Look at the mound of black pebbles! 
(turning to Lak~anaraka) 
In case you don't recognise yourself, 
Your country is TJ.mralipti, India;!1 
And your city is Santikala. 
Your father is the butcher, Tripon,21 
Who came here eight years ago. 
Your mother is the butcheress, Pelkyi, 23 
Who came here five years ago. 
You are the offspring of these outcaste butchers. 
Now you have come here-haven't you? 
The year is the Water Female Pig/4 325 
And this year your feeding [in the human world] has come to 
an end. 
All those of eastern India 
Call you 'Red-handeJ Butcher'; 
All those of southern India 
Call you the 'wrongdoing Lak~anaraka '; 
All those of western India 
Call you 'Black Low-caste Butcher'; 
All those of northern India 
Call you the 'Black Killer of All'. 
Your caste is the black cm_uj.zla caste 
And your family line is that of wrongdoing butchers. 
All generations of your family without exception 
Will take the path to hell. 
When you were killing, you seemed happy; 
When you ate, it seemed tasty, 
But does it taste so good now? 
What use is your clever, slick-talking tongue [now]? 
Now the time has come for you to experience suffering, 
In retribution for the million animal lives [you have taken]. 
If you don't experience this suffering, 
Then millions of creatures will have lost everything, 
And you, Lak~anJ.raka, will have gained everything. THI: TIBETA!' BOOK OF THE DEAD 
As far as retribution for your crimes is concerned, 
Even Dharmaraja with his mighty stature 
Cannot stop the effects of your negative actions, 
The greatest of which was burning down the temple, 
And the smallest of which was the killing of lice. 
This is why you have accumulated [all] these [black! pebbles. 
So it is best if you prepare yourself to move on. 
[Get ready to] go swiftly on this black path! 
[There], the sealed copper cauldron [that awaits you] is wide 
and deep, 
The waves of boiling bronze are fierce, 
The fiery mass of past actions is intensely hot, 
And the messengers of Yama have scant mercy. 
Dharmaraja 's attitude is extremely fierce, 
The weapons of past actions are sharply pointed, 
And the black winds of past actions are very powerful. 
Now is the time for you to go to such a place! 
Though I really do have compassion for you, 
I am nonetheless very, very satisfied! 
You must carry on your back the weight and measure, 
Which you used as a fraudulent weight and measure! 
You must wear at your side the weapons 
With which you killed many sentient beings! 
You cannot deny or misrepresent these things! 
Now the time has come for you to go 
To the citadels of the eighteen hells. 
(He begins to lead [Lak~anaraka] away.) 
DHARMARAJ A: 
Alas! How pitiful! How terrifying! 
When one has obtained a human form, 
One should proceed, with highly purposeful virtuous conduct, 
On the path of liberation, where inferior rebirths are left 
behind; 
And [thus] one is never separated from peace and happiness. 
But on this occasion when you obtained a human life, 
You threw away positive actions like dirt, 
And seized upon negative actions, 
For which reason you have wasted this highly meaningful 
human body, 
Which is difficult to obtain. ~lA '-K I·. I.J D RA ~~A 
Since you have done nothing at all, other than return 
empty-handed [from this life], 
You are [only] carrying the burden of your negative acts! How 
sad! 
Since the actions you have carried out must ripen upon 
yourself, 
You cannot be protected even by the power of a thousand 
budd has. 
So I cannot respond to this, [your appeal], in any way! 
Since the results of the premeditated negative acts, 
Which you carried out when you had freedom, 
Will all come to ripen upon you, 
Even though you wail and lament, 
No one at all should feel sorry for you. 
Even though you have hopes in me, 
I have no means to act in any way. 
Since this mirror of past actions, which reflects phenomenal 
existence, 
Truly depicts the natural expression of virtuous and negative 
acts, 
How can it be that no past actions will appear in the case of 
wrongdoers? 
\X'hen the deity who is your good conscience 
And the demon who is your bad conscience 
Compare the black and white pebbles of past actions, 
Happy is the man who has accumulated virtue! 
How very remorseful are you, who have accumulated evil! 
On this dangerous red passageway traversed by all, 
When you arc brought to trial by the executors of Yam a's 
rites, 
Even though you may have been once very powerful, 
Here, it will be of no avail! 
Now is the time for the hearts and lungs of all great 
wrongdoers to be torn apart! 
Since you have practised non-virtue, 
This reckoning of your past actions 
Will be quicker and more powerful than lightning, 
So by fleeing you will not escape, 
And by showing remorse, this will be of no help! 
How pitiful are the human beings of Jambudvipa }2.8 TilE TIBETA:-.1 BOOK OF TilE DEAU 
Who do not strive to practise the [sacred] teachings! 
There will be no way of helping them. 
This detailed accounting of positive and negative past actions 
Forbids even the most minute negative deeds-
So what are those humans who have no scruples thinking of! 
Though the white path of liberation leads to joy, 
And the black path of inferior rebirth leads to suffering, 
The humans of Jambudvipa do not abandon negative actions, 
Nor do they practise positive actions, 
lAnd], even though they may feel sadness and remorse, 
Past actions cannot be remade. 
One's past actions accompany one's body like a shadow. 
I hold all rewards in respect of positive virtues, 
And I exact punishments in respect of negative deeds. 
Judging the balance and counterbalance, 
I examine good and bad actions. 
So even though you have regrets, I cannot redo anything. 
Now, even though I am very merciful, there is still no way that 
I can help you. 
Once you take the black path to the hell realms, 
You cannot be saved, even if you were to be engulfed by the 
compassion of the Sublime Ones. 
So there is absolutely no way for me to do anything. 
The Conqueror has said that sentient beings must reap !the 
fruits of] their own past actions. 
So now the Ox-headed One will lead you away! 
~tay your negativity and obscurations be quickly purified, 
And may you then attain the ultimate level of the buddhas. 
OX-HEADED RAK~A: Since it is your own doing, even though 
you may have regrets, what is the use of that! As for us, we are 
not responsible [for your actions]! We have simply distinguished 
between truth and lies. If you had no responsibility for your past 
actions, then it would be meaningless for us to harm you. Now, 
as this is [the outcome of] your past actions, be off quickly! 
(Then he leads [Lak~anarakaj away by a black noose, and'ihe 
black demon [representing the had conscience} driues him from 
behind, goading him along the path represented by the black car­
pet. Then in a dark room he is subjected to shouts of 'Strike! Kill!', 
which cause him to cry out in all sorts of ways.) :0.1 A~ K E 0 0 R A M A 
THE SPIRITUAL TEACHER (then makes a detailed elucidation, 
beginning with the words): 0, Children of Buddha Nature, those 
who have committed evil deeds will be singled out in this manner 
and their sufferings will be the same [as those described here]. You 
will definitely have such experiences. So, whether this core dilemma 
besets you at this time or not will depend on you yourselves. From 
now onwards, it is therefore important for you to strive after 
virtue, and avoid negativity, 0, Children of Buddha Nature ... 
ACT TWO 
DHAR~1ARAJ A (as he draws a cross on his wooden slate): Alas! 
Ox-headed Rak~a, there is someone from a household in the 
human world whose lifespan has come to an end. This sign has 
appeared on my wooden slate. 
ox-HEADED RAK?A (calling to the venomous Snake-headed 
Demon): 0 Venomous Snake-headed One, look in your mirror! 
Look and see where the deceased is! 
VENO~lOUS SNAKE-HEADED DE~lON: The land of the one 
whose time has come, is in north-east India. The city is called 
Kaman1pa.25 His social class, among the four classes, is the mercan­
tile class/6 and his name is the householder, Srijata. His lifespan 
and merits have been exhausted, so the sign of this has appeared 
on the wooden slate. Now be off, quickly [and fetch him]! 
(So, all three, Ox-headed R,zk~a, Boar-headed Cemetery Spirit, 
and the demon representing /the deceased's] bad conscience run 
off, while in their wake, the deity representing [the deceased's] 
good conscience rushes to his assistance. As soon as they have 
found the householder, Srfjdta, in the human world at Kdmarupa, 
the Ox-headed One leads him away and the Boar-headed One 
holds his arm, as the demon representing [the deceased's] bad 
conscience chases lnm from behind. Meanwhile, the deity rep­
resenting the good conscience of/ers assistance as the deceased is 
brought into the presence of Dharmardja, who questions him.) 
DHARMARAJ A: 0, deceased Child of Buddha Nature, have you 
not come from the human world? There you had a human body 
endowed with freedom and favourable opportunities, which is 
difficult to acquire. You have encountered the Buddha's teachings, 
which are difficult to encounter; and you have been born as a man THI:: TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
in Jambudvipa, where it is difficult to take birth. \X'hat positive or 
virtuous past actions have you gathered? When you lived in the 
human world, did you practise the [sacred] teachings mindful of 
[cultivating] mental virtues and physical purity? What com­
pounded virtues and attributes do you possess that would enable 
you to be saved !from rebirth in the hells]? Did you create [images, 
books and stOpasj representative of buddha-body, speech and 
mind? Did you commission the writing and recitation of the scrip­
tures? Did you mould terracotta imprints? Did you offer water 
libations? Did you clear rocks from roads? Did you remove bother­
some thorns from bad roads? Did you make offerings to those 
above? Did you bestow charity on those below? Did you scatter 
barley dough and grain at anthills? What other subtle acts of virtue 
did you accumulate, over and above these? Also, did you study, 
reflect and meditate jon the Buddhist teachings], and did you 
keep your one-day vows and fasts? Did you receive meditative 
instruction, empowerments and guidance? What other virtues of 
this type have you accumulated? Tell me quickly now! Negative 
past actions related to the body are killing, of which the greatest 
offence is the killing of one's parents and the smallest is the killing 
of lice and nits, stealing, improper sexual conduct and so forth. So 
what negative a...:tions of body have you accumulated? 
Then the negative actions related to speech are: meaningless 
gossip, harsh words, slander, lies and so forth. So what negative 
actions of speech have you accumulated? 
The negative actions related to mind are: covetousness, harmful 
intent, distorted views, and so on. So what negative actions have 
you accumulated mentally? 
Also, with regard to the five inexpiable crimes and the five 
approximate [crimes], what negative or non-virtuous actions have 
you accumulated, motivated through body, speech, or mind? Tell 
me now in clear detail! 
THE HOUSEHOLDER SRIJATA (i11 a terrified and trembfmg 
uoice): Nlay I speak in the presence of Dharmaraja! I am the 
householder Srijata, a citizen of the city of Kamaropa in the north­
east of India. I also have female dependants. I was a humble perSon, 
self-sufficient in food and drink. I was a faithful devotee who made 
fulsome offerings to all the fine spiritual teachers who came to 
my distri...:t. I encouraged others to engage in virtuous actions. 
Y1oti\·c.ucd by virtue and good intent, I have restored ruined ~I A '\ K E U U I{ A :\1 A 3 3 I 
temples, saved many living creatures from certain death, and 
repeatedly received profound empowerments and guidance. When 
I travelled around, I cleared dangerous paths; when I stayed [at 
home] I recited the Six-syllable Mantra, and I kept my one-day 
vows and fasts. I am a householder who made offerings to the 
Three Precious Jewels above, and gave charity to those of unfortu­
nate birth below. I am indeed a bodhisattva. This is why everyone 
calls me the householder Lak~min ('endowed with wealth'). Such 
is the unbroken sequence of my virtuous actions. 
As for my negative past actions, although I had the intention 
not to harm even a single living being, since I was submerged in 
the perverse world which is cyclic existence, and I had a son, and 
in order for him to be able to join in matrimony, I took the lives 
of ten animals [for the wedding feast]. I confessed the negativity 
of this action, and recited the Diamond Cutter27 one hundred 
times. 
Then, when I and my neighbours took the lives of many living 
cre~Hures in order to pay taxes in support of the village community, 
I too felt much remorse and made confession. Also, since I had 
lived as a worldly householder, I thought that I must have uninten­
tionally killed [many insects] underfoot and by my hands, for 
which reason I often felt remorse. 
Since the credentials of my virtuous and negative actions are 
established in these ways, I beg you to consider this conduct and 
favour me with your compassion. 
DHARMA RAJ A: Well then, if it is true what you have said, then 
you have thought well about virtuous and negative actions, and 
about cause and effect; but I shall consult the mirror of past actions 
because you human beings are clever liars! (He shows him the 
mirror.) Look, fortunate Child of Buddha Nature! This mirror of 
past actions in which phenomenal existence is clearly reflected is 
clearer than the omniscient eye that perceives the three times. When 
it manifestly reveals the natural expression of virtuous and negative 
past actions, whatever you have done in the human world, all the 
virtuous and negative actions you have committed in the human 
world, will visibly appear, immediately. So what lies and deceit 
have you spoken? Look at this mirror right now! (Then, looking 
at the mirror) Well, the virtuous and negative actions of which you 
ha\'e now spoken are not false. Well done! You will be sent on the 
white path. THE TIBLTAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
THE BLACK DEMON [H.EPRESENTING THE DECEASED'S BAD 
CONSCIENCE]: Hey! !\lay I speak in the presence of Dharmaraja! 
This bad person called the householder Srijata, has indulged his 
whole life in negative actions and has cared only for his own 
long-term selfish interests. His name is householder Srijata, and 
his nickname is 'monkey-head'. As for this faithless householder 
Srijata, his [birth] year is the year of the ox, his [birthjplace is 
Kamaropa city, and his background is that of the mercantile class. 
He engaged in the following negative actions: Hurrying uptown, 
he killed his father and quarrelled; then rushing downtown, he 
fought with his neighbours, he threw stones at the camel belonging 
to his neighbour Sribhadra and although he killed it, he denied his 
action and lied about it. He pushed the scribe Prajnamati's young 
elephant over a cliff, and, although he killed it, he denied his action 
and lied about it. Now, we can compare the pebbles! How will it 
be possible for him to take the white path? It is utterly appropriate 
that he should go on the black path. (He pours three handjit!s of 
black pebbles in [to his bowl}.) 
THE WHITE DEITY [REPRESENTING THE GOOD COJ\iSClENCE): 
May I speak in the presence of Dharmaraja! The householder 
Lak~min [Srijata] is a most faithful devotee. He has strong interest 
in the [sacred] teachings and has a\'<>iJed negative actions. When 
about five hundred miscreants were brought to trial in the presence 
of the Maharaja, he offered five hundred srang of golJ, and saved 
their lives. In the Indian city of Kamaropa, the householder Srijata 
alone is one who possesses great faith. Now, we can compare the 
pebbles! How will it be possible for him to take the black path? 
He should now set out, guided along the white path! (He pours 
out about six measures of white pebbles [into his bow/].) 
THE MONKEY-HEADED ELE~tENTAL SPIRIT: Deity and demon 
of conscience, both of you have no need to disagree, because when 
I raise my scale balance, the measures of virtue and negativity will 
be determined by the weights. Now, if you look, [the outcome! 
will be obvious. (He weighs the pebbles, whereupon the white 
[container] is three times heavier.) 
DHARMA RAJ A: Wonderful! Those who have obtained a hufnan 
body, who delight in the [sacred! teachings, and fully realise their 
life's potential- as this [achievement] cannot he stolen or snatched 
by others -will themselves find happiness through their own vir­
tues. With respect to this way of being, such as that of the house-.\-1 A S K E D 0 R A .\I A 333 
holder Lak~min [ Srij~'ita ]-how wondnful it would be if all sentient 
beings were to do the same! Supplicate AvalokitesYara right now, 
and instJntly trJvel the \'vhite path! (Dihzrnzardja prays) I pray to 
the meditational deity !vlahak<1rul}ika, at the summit of Mount 
Pot<1laka in rhe east! Grant your blessing that we may realise the 
nature of mind to be the Buddha-body of Reality! (He then recites 
the Aspirational Prayer [Calling] to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
for Assistance2s and then giues formal introduction to the methods 
for obstmcting the womb entrances during the intermediate state 
[of rehirth j and for choosi11g u womh. 2
'~ Lastly, he confers the 
introduction to the methods of transferring {consciousness} to the 
pure buddha-fields. w Immediately afterwards, the curtain is sud­
denly dr~.1w11 hack, and the form of Aualokitesuara is vividly dis­
pl .. zyed. [The householder Srij~u..zj is led along the path [of virtue} 
represented by the white curpct, clad in fine robes, and wearing 
fine orname11ts.) 
DHAR\1:\RAJA (o!/ering praise): 0, Child of Buddha Nature, 
this is how one should serve the purpose of obtaining a human 
body. Rejoice [in this]! (Then, he recites the following aspirational 
prayer ol At•,Jiokite5uar£l three times.) 
0~1 \tA:;.;I PAD.\IE H0.~1 HRll,f!\1 
~lay all sentient beings, including you Srljara, 
Be guided on the p~uh by the essence of the Six-syllable 
Mantra! 
~lay cyclic existence with its three \vorld-systcms be churned 
to irs depths, 
And may the hells be exhausted and emptied! 
(He urges fail to recite} that Six-syllable Mantra.) 
THE SPIRITUAL TEACHER: 0, Children of Buddha Nature, 
behold this distinction between the happiness and suffering experi­
enced by the evil 'Red-handed Burcher' and the faithful house­
holder Srijata, in consequence of their disparate accumulations of 
virtue ~1nd negativity! As we ourselves shall also encounter such 
experiences soon, it is most important that we strive after virtue 
.. mJ refrain from negativity! (Then, [the spiritual teacher} should 
conj'er the empowerment fof the Peaceful and \Y/r,zthful Deities}, 
recite the auspicious verses, and perform the aspirational prayer 
for the dedzc.ltion oj'merit, followed by the concluding rite.) 334 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
COLOPHON 
How wonderful! I, Padmakara, having actually seen the hells, 
composed this [masked drama] as an adjunct to the teaching of 
the [Great] Liberation by Hearing in the Intermediate States, in 
order to benefit sentient beings of the future. May it be encountered 
by those who are fortunate! 
This concludes the Natural Liberation of the Intermediate State 
of Rebirth: A Teaching Revealing the Natural Expression of Virtue 
and Negativity. 32 May all be auspicious!33 PART TWO 
Supplement to the Masked Drama of Rebirth 
Herein is contained the Supplement to the Teaching Revealing the 
Natural Expression of Virtue and Negativity in the Intermediate 
State of Rebirth, entitled Gong of Divine Melody;1 which is an 
extract from the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred 
Teaching, [entitled] Natural Liberation through [Recognition of] 
Enlightened lntention.2 
I bow down to Samantabhadra and the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities! 
THE SCENE 
(In the context of [the masked drama entitled] A Teaching 
Revealing the Natural Expression of Virtue and Negativity which 
is [associated with the] Introduction to the Intermediate State of 
Rebirth, the one called 'the wrongdoing Lak~aniiraka' ('hundred 
thousand hells') is shown entering the inferior realms. Amidst the 
thunderous cries of 'Strike!' and 'Kill!' uttered by the executors of 
Yama's rites, he travels the black path, after which Dharmariija 
teaches on the disadvantages of committing negative actions to 
the entire audience assembled there.] Following this, the deity 
representing the good conscience [should appear] in a state of 
sadness, and should urge [the audience to recite] the Six-syllable 
Mantra.) 336 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
ACT ONE 
THE DEITY REPRESENTING THE GOOD CONSCIENCE: Please 
recite the Six-syllable Mantra once on behalf of the deceased, the 
wrongdoing Lak~anaraka! O¥ MAJ';JI PADME HO¥ HRIJ:I! Please 
recite the Six-syllable Mantra once on behalf of all beings present 
within the intermediate state [of rebirth]! (Then speaking to the 
assembled audience) 0 listen! I am the one called deity of good 
conscience. This wrongdoing Lak~anaraka has committed many 
negative actions, as a result of which, at this moment, in the 
whole world, I can only find six tiny white pebbles representing 
his virtuous actions, but there are innumerable pebbles [here] rep­
resenting his non-virtuous past actions. [Now], by the power of 
his bad past actions, he has been led away to the hells by the 
executors of Yama's rites. Although I wanted to guide him to 
higher rebirths, I have been unable to find a way [to help him]. 
All of you who inhabit the human world of Jambudvipa, and 
all of you gathered here, should not now engage in negative actions 
but practise only virtue. These following messages are the ones 
which we [now] send to you [from the intermediate state of 
rebirth]! (Then, circumambulating the mm.u!ala,4 and chanting the 
Six-syllable Mantra in a melodious voice, he continues with a sad 
demeanour.) 
How wonderful! I pray to gracious Dharmaraja, 
Glorious embodiment of the activities of the buddhas of the 
three times, 
Who manifests for the benefit of beings! 
Alas! Listen and be attentive, all you gathered here! 
[Considering] the difficulties of obtaining a human form, 
All those who commit non-virtuous and negative acts [while 
living in the world] 
Will have missed the opportunity of escaping from this ocean 
of suffering. 
All [such] beings living in this world, 
Who arc [all] powerless to remain [in the world] for long, 
Will feel remorse when entering the jaws of the Lord of Death. 
But [this remorse] will be of no benefit to them then-
For, despite their sorrows, they will be obliged to move on! :vi.ASKED DRAMA 
All peoples of the past have gathered family and wealth 
[around them], 
Hoping these would last forever-
But, when [their own] impermanence and death arrive, 
They set out alone, devoid of refuge or sanctuary. 
The relatives and friends surrounding us in this life 
Are like a gathering of shoppers at a market. 
Although they seem close to us, they are not dependable. 
When the market closes, the shoppers will disperse. 
[Likewise,] this illusory aggregate of form, 
Like a fallen cairn at the top of a pass, 
Will be severed of all its flesh and bones. 
This our body is not to be relied on! 
Even though we have cherished this body, 
[A collection] of pus, blood, serum, and sinews, 
It is nonetheless [ever] on the verge of disintegration. 
Even though we miss it, birds and dogs will devour it, 
Even though we [try to sustain it by] engaging in ritual 
services, 
It will be snatched away by Yama, the lord of death. 
This body composed of the four elements will be left behind 
on the earth, 
Our consciousness will travel as a wanderer through the 
intermediate states, 337 
And the habitual tendencies of our negative past actions will 
follow like a shadow. 
How pitiful that we have committed non-virtuous actions! 
The deity and demon representing our good and bad 
consCience 
Will compare the white and black pebbles of past actions, 
And Dharmaraja will reveal all in the [all-seeing] mirror. 
All great wrongdoers will suffer these torments. 
Even though they should not commit even the slightest 
Qegative acts, 
The human beings of Jambudvipa are let down by 
wrongdoing! 
It is by engaging in virtue that they will be reborn in the higher 
realms, 
And by engaging in negativity that they will travel to the hells. 
At this one time, when one has attained a human body, THE TIBETA!'< BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
But failed to return with at least some virtue, 
What a pity it is that we carry the [alternative] burden of 
negativity, 
And bring sufferings upon ourselves! 
The hunters in the mountains, 
The fishermen by the rivers, 
And those who kill domestic livestock 
Will transmigrate and be reborn in the eighteen hells. 
Those who engage in deceit and deception, 
Having adulterated measures and weights, 
And those who steal, plunder or deceive 
Will long roam through the three inferior existences. 
Those bound to their wealth by the knot of miserliness, 
Those who squander the property of others, 
And those who appropriate donations made to the Three 
Precious Jewels, 
Will long roam through the realms of anguished spirits. 
This, the impact of non-virtuous past actions 
Is like a thunderbolt, it is extremely powerful. 
And even though we feel remorse, it will be of no help­
We will not be able to escape! 
The punishment for negative actions is exacted by Yama. 
In this dangerous passageway, traversed by all, 
The executors of Yama's rites bring us to trial. 
Pity those human beings who do not avoid negativity­
For there is no way to help them. 
How severe is the attitude of Dharmaraja! 
How precise is the accounting of the deity and demon of 
conscience! 
How remorseful are the great wrongdoers! 
Only by engaging in virtue, will one proceed to higher 
rebirths. 
Alas! The body ages day by day. 
The lifespan is consumed moment by moment. 
Dying in turn, one after another, 
Sentient beings of this errant degenerate age 
Have lifespans shorter than the tail of a sheep! 
All householders with many dependants, [such as this 
wrongdoer], 
Will reap the fruits of their evil past actions in so many ways, .\1 A') KL D L) 1{:\:0.1 :\ 339 
And even their relatives and friends will [one day] arise as their 
enemies. 
In these bad times, keeping a household [can in itself] engender 
sorrow. 
Now, fthereforeJ, having attained a human body, 
Endowed with freedom and favourable opportunities, 
Direct your thought towards your own mind! 
The critical point is to concentrate on the sacred teachings! 
Then, you will be happy in this life and joyful in the next. 
ACT TWO 
(Then again, fin the masked drama of rebirth/, when the house­
holder Srijata is shown setting off for the realms of higher rebirth, 
he prays in the presence of Avalokitesvara, and after [Dharmaraja] 
h.zs finished reciting the aspirational prayer of Avalokitesvara on 
beh.zlf of Srijata, the householder is adorned with fine ornaments, 
and inst.zlled upon a throne. Then, before the multitude of the five 
hosts of qdkinis arriue to welcome him with music and song, at 
that time, the deity o( good conscience should joyfully make the 
follotuing prayer, telling uf the advantages of abandoning negativ­
ity and practising uirtue.') 
THE DEITY REPRESENTING THE GOOD CONSCIENCE: 
I pray to Samantabhadra and Samantabhadrl, the 
Buddha-body of Reality, 
\X'ho abide in Akanigha, the palace of reality's expanse! 
I pray to Vajradhara, [lord of] the sixth [enlightened family], 
Who abides in the Buddha field of the Dense Array. 
I pray to the Teacher Vajrasattva, 
\\'ho abides in the Buddha field of Abhirati. 
I pray to the awareness holder Prahevajra, 
\Vho abides in the mary<;iala of spiralling rainbO\v lights!6 
I pray to the learned Sri Sirpha, 
Who abides in the assembly hall of Dhanakosa. 
I pray to Padmakara of O<;ic)iyana, 
\X'ho abides in the celestial palace of Lotus Light! 
I pray to the <;lakin! Yeshe Tsogyal, 
\X'ho abides in the pure palace of the sky-farers! THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
I pray to the accomplished master Karma Lingpa, 
Who abides in the buddha field of the Buddha-body of 
Emanation! 
I pray to his spiritual son Nyinda Choje, 
Who abides in the limitless palace of the [sacred] teachings! 
I pray to the peerless Soryacandra, 
Who abides in the palace where the benefit of living beings is 
spontaneously accomplished! 
I pray to the precious root spiritual teacher, 
Seated on a sun and moon cushion above the crown of my 
head!7 
I pray to the infinitude of Peaceful and Wrathful meditational 
Deities, 
Who abide in the maQ.c)ala of the Conquerors, which is one's 
own body!8 
I pray to the protectors of the [sacredJ teachings Magon 
Chamdrel, 
Who abide in the palace of the transmitted precepts and 
commitments! 
How wonderful! 
At this time when we have obtained a human body, 
Endowed with freedom and favourable opportunities, 
How amazing are our positive virtues! 
At this time when our five sense-faculties are intact, 
How amazing is it to be attracted by the [sacred] teachings! 
At this time when we have encountered the Buddha's teaching, 
How amazing it is to abandon non-virtue and negativity! 
At this time when we possess illusory wealth and property, 
How wonderful it is to offer these upwards to the Three 
Precious Jewels and downwards as charity! 
Once we have abandoned negativity, there will be no more 
inferior rebirths. 
How amazing is this householder Lak~min [Srljata], right here, 
Who, having practised virtue, has obtained a higher rebirth! 
How amazing is this householder Srljata, right here, 
Who is now going [to higher rebirth] in a core-penetrating 
way," 
Without passing [further] through the intermediate state [of 
rebirth]! MASKED DRAMA 341 
How amazing is this householder Lak~min fSrrjata], 
Who has achieved happiness through the fruit of his virtue­
Srrjata has reached the highest summit of his life's potential! 
(Thereupon, the hosts of welcoming cjakinis, adorned with the six 
kinds of bone ornaments, begin to dance, playing their cjamarus 
and bells, and, emerging from behind the door, they come to 
welcome him, singing o~ MA~I PADME HO~ HRII:I in a sweet 
melody.) 
THE HOSTS OF QAKINIS: 
We have come from the land of the 9akinrs. 
We have come to invite the householder Srrjata! 
We have come from 0~9iyana. 
We have come to invite the householder Srrjata! 
We have come from Camaradvrpa. 
We have come to invite the householder Srijata! 
We have come from the Copper-coloured Mountain. 
We have come to invite the householder Srrjata! 
We have come from Mount Potalaka. 
We have come to invite the householder Srljata! 
We have come from the pure realm of the sky-farers. 
0, great householder Srrjata, 
Please come to the buddha fields! 
(The hosts of cjakinis encircle the householder, and he too begins 
to play the musical instruments /that he holds] in his hands and to 
dance with them. Then he exits together with the host of cjakinfs.) 
This Supplement to the Teaching Revealing the Natural Expression 
of Virtue and Negativity in the Intermediate State of Rebirth, 
entitled Gong of Divine Melody, was composed by Namka Chokyi 
Gyatso on the third day of the ninth month of the sheep year at 
the retreat of Kharlateng, in front of the hermitage of Sangye 
Rinpoche, a place frequented by frontier tribes. By the power of 
virtue, may all beings be established on the level of Samantabhadra! 14 
Liberation by Wearing: 
Natural Liberation of the 
Psycho-physical Aggregates CONTEXT 
As explained in the earlier chapters, this cycle of teachings contains 
a number of instructions which can effect liberation from cyclic 
existence, without prior experience of the meditations associated 
with the Vehicle of Indestructible Reality (Vajrayana). Amongst these 
expressions of the sacred teachings is this Liberation by Wearing, 
which is said to effect liberation simply by its being worn as a mantra 
amulet on the body at the time of death or by its being heard at the 
time of death. 
The text of this chapter expresses the enlightened intention of the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities in the form of mantra-letters. These 
mantra-letters are the resonance of the pure awareness of the deities 
expressed in the form of letter shapes and sounds. 
Many practitioners of this cycle of teachings wear this mantra circle 
in an amulet throughout their lives. For others it is recommended that 
the mantra amulet should be worn at the time of death and not 
removed. It is also recommended that this text should be read 
aloud at the conclusion of each reading of the Liberation by Hearing 
(Chapter 11). The ~1antra Circle of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities Herein is contained the Liberation by Wearing: Natural Lib­
eration of the Psycho-physical Aggregates, 1 an extract from the 
PeLzceful and Wrathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, fen­
titled] Natural Liberation through [Recognition of} Enlightened 
lntcntion.2 
I bow down to rhc primordial lords, Samantabhadra and 
Samantabhadri, 
And to the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities! 
This [text] is the Liberation by Wearing: Natural Liberation of 
the Psycho-physical Aggregates, 
In which [the mantras] of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, 
Those Gone to Bliss, are encompassed. 
How wonderful! This is a great naturally arising [mantra 
circle]. 
The yogin who embraces this is immensely fortunate. 
The yogin who encounters this is immensely fortunate. 
The yogin who upholds this is immensely fortunate. 
The yogin who reads this is immensely fortunate. 
As it confers liberation by reading, there is no need for 
meditation. 
As it confers liberation by wearing, there is no need for 
spiritual practice. 
As it confers liberation through contact, there is no need for 
training. 
As it confers liberation through feeling, there is no need for 
reflection. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
This [mantra circle] confers natural liberation whenever it is 
encountered. 
This is the natural liberation of the psycho-physical aggregates. 
This is a field of experience of the fortunate! 
[PART ONE] 
How wonderful! 
The enlightened intention of the father Samantabhadra 
Manifests as the following naturally present mantra syllables 
of Atiyoga: 
0¥ Al:f H0~t1 EMA KIRI KIRI MASTABHALIBHAI.I SA~liTA­
SURUSURU KUNDHAI.IMASUMASU EKARILISUBIIASTAYE 
CAKIRABHULITA CAYESAMUNTA CARYASUGHAYE BHITISA­
NABHYAGHULIYE SAKARIDHUKANI MATARIBHETANA PARALI­
HISANA MAKHARTAKELANA SAMBHURATA MAIKACARATA.MBA 
SURYAGIIATARAYE BASHANA RANABHITI SAGHUTIPAYA GHU­
RAGHURAPAGAKHARANALA¥ NARANARAYI THARAPATALA~t 
SI RNASIRNABH ESARASPALA¥ BHU DDHABHUDDHACliiSA­
SAGHELA¥ SASA ~~ 1;-{. II MAMA RARA LAHA A 4 
This is the twenty-six line supreme essential mantra, 
Through which the enlightened intention of Samantabhadra 
Will naturally liberate mental apprehension in awareness, 
As an indestructible chain of light, primordially pure and 
indivisible from Samantabhadra l when it is worn at the time of 
death!, 
While [externally! a cloudless sky will appear. 
How wonderful! 
The enlightened intention of the mother Samantabhadrl 
~tanifests as the following naturally present mantra-syllables 
of Atiyoga. 
This is the essential mantra, liberating body, speech and mind 
in primordial purity: 
0¥ A~l H0¥ EMA KIRI KIRI MASTABHALI SAMITASURUSURU 
KUNUHALIMASU EKARILISUBHASTAYE CATABHULITA CAYESA­
~tUNTA CARYASUGHAYE BHITISANABHYAGHUYE KIRIDHAKINI LIBERATION BY WEARING 349 
D II AKA .M AHA B H 0 R I TAN A PAR ALI HI SA:..; A~ K H ARATA K E LA .~1 
SAMBHUDDARATA MEGACARAPATA¥ TAPASURYAGHATARA A 
MANAPARABHIHO TINGHURALA MASMINSAGHUTILA TAYA­
GHURAGHURA RA~GAKHALARANALA~t NARANARALA~1 ITHAR­
PATALA~t SIR~ASIR!'iABHISARALA~t SAKELA~t SASA ~~~~II 
MAMA RARA5 
This is the essential mantra through which the enlightened 
intention of Samantahhadri liberates 
The dynamic motion of awareness, encumbered by 
phenomenal characteristics, in unborn emptiness. 
This is the twenty-nine line supreme essential mantra, 
Through which liberation will occur in primordial purity, 
indivisible from Samantabhadri, [when it is worn at the time of 
death], 
While l externally I a clear and unobscurcd sky will appear. 
How wonderful! 
To symbolise the perfection of all enlightened attributes, 
The [following] twenty-five mantras which reverse attachment 
arc prcscntcd:6 
To avert attachment to the sense-faculties, 
lThcre is the mantra]: KARMA RAK~A GHIHA~lTI. 
!When it is worn at the time of death! 
It will confer natural liberation by subduing the beguiling force 
of the dissonant mental states, 
While I externally J a bright red rainbow will appear. 
To avert attachment to the psycho-physical aggregates, 
!There is the mantra]: BHIKARA~A SO GAD GLING. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will confer natural liberation by subduing the beguiling force 
of the psycho-physical aggregates, 
\X'hile [externally] a bright yellow rainbow will appear. 
To avert attachment to all sense objects, 
[There is the mantra]: BHUGARILABHADHUTRI. 
[W'hen it is worn at the time of deathJ 350 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
It will confer natural liberation by subduing the beguiling force 
of 'deva's son', 
While [externally] a bright white rainbow will appear. 
To let go of mental objects, 
(There is the mantra): RAMAKALASAMIKHYE. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will confer natural liberation by subduing the beguiling force 
of the 'lord of death', 
While [externally] a bright green rainbow will appear. 
To sever past sensations, right where they are, 
(There is the mantra): MATAMPHAPHERAMITI. 
!When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will naturally liberate the ground-of-all [consciousness] in 
primordial purity, 
While [externally I a bright blue rainbow will appear. 
To recognise the appearance of compounded aggregations, 
(There is the mantra]: KHATAREK?ASA MIG RLUNG. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will spontaneously liberate naturally manifesting 
appearances in primordial purity, 
While [externally] a phenomenon like the unfolding of 
dazzling brocade will appear. 
To enter the stronghold of awareness, 
(There is the mantra]: EKARANABHECAK~A. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will induce the attainment of the 'irreversible level',' 
While [externally] sarirmtz relics will appear [following the 
cremation]. 
To eradicate the continuum of bewilderment, 
!There is the mantra]: YARIMUTRASAGHULI. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will naturally liberate the three world-systems in primordial 
purity, 
While I externally I churiraJ?Z relics will appear [following the 
cremation]. Ll B E R ,\ T I 0 N B Y ~· E A H I N G 
To successively liberate the six classes of living beings, 
[There is the mantra): YASIRA~l RLUNG PALAYA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 351 
It will naturally liberate beings of the six classes in primordial 
purity, 
\X'hile [externally] nyarirtl1!1 relics will appear [following the 
cremation]. 
To purge cyclic existence from its depths, 
[There is the mantra): MAMAKOLINA~t SAMANTA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will churn the depths of all lower existences, 
While [externally] parzc~m11rz relics will appear [following the 
cremation]. 
To suppress apparitional reality, 
[There is the mantra): GIIARI LA~1BARIMA¥TI. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will guide [the deceased I to the genuine reality, 
While [externally] serrir,lf?Z relics will appear [following the 
cremation]. 
To let go of the 'source of the pia y [of phenomena]', 
[There is the mantra]: BUGASINHAPHANGALA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will liberate the phenomena that arise, right where they are, 
\X'hile [externally] manifold shimmering rainbows will appear. 
To sever the tethers of attachment, 
[There is the mantra): RAMISIPIKHETAPA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will liberate objects of attachment in the expanse [of reality J, 
\X'hile [extenully] a clear and bright sky will appear. 
To focus on the chains [of light], 
[There is the mantra]: BHIKIIUMALABATA¥KE. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will induce the 'visionary appearance of increasing 
contemplative experience',!! 
While [externally I patterns will arise from the rainbow colours 
in the sky. 352 TilE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
To view the seal of the deity, 
[There is the mantra]: SAMANYIVADHERARA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will induce the 'visionary appearance of reaching the limit of 
awareness',9 
While [externally] the forms of the deities will appear. 
To purify mistaken views and meditations, 
[There is the mantra]: VAJRA SATTVA TIDHOME. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
Awareness will be naturally perfected, 
While [externally] white rainbow lights will appear. 
To simultaneously reach the levels and the paths, 
[There is the mantra]: GHEPASUGHARNAMYE. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
The levels and paths will be simultaneously perfected, 
While [externally J the natural sound of reality will resound. 
To sever the basis of views which indulge in mental activity, 
[There is the mantra]: DHARMAPATISAGHULI. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
Digressions will be liberated, right where they occur, 
While [externally] white rays of light will appear. 
To cause the three buddha-bodies to manifest as the path, 
[There is the mantra]: RASMISAMAKHARGAD TSHE. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
The three buddha-bodies will arise as the path, 
While [externally] perceptions of light will appear. 
To cause the visionary appearances to genuinely arise, 
[There is the mantra]: ROPASAMIMITALI. 
[When it is worn at the time of death I 
A simultaneous, naked liberation will occur, 
While [externally I winds and breezes will arise in the 
atmosphere. LIBERATIOIS BY \VEARI:--IG 
To terminate attachment to sound, 
[There is the mantra): NATIBALAGlLISA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 353 
Liberation will occur in the inexpressible, ineffable state, 
While [externally] the number of rainbow lights that are seen 
will transcend recollection. 
To master the levels of exalted meditative concentration, 
[There is the mantra]: GHACCHAPAYA¥PA ETA¥. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
The singular perfection of the levels and paths will be reached, 
While [externally] the number of rainbow lights that are seen 
will induce non-conceptuality. 
To extend buddha-activity to its limits, 
[There is the mantra): KARMA EKANUSA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
Liberation will occur as essence, natural expression, and 
compassionate energy, 10 
While [externally] manifold subtle relics will appear [following 
the cremation.] 
To avert expressed attachment to buddhahood, 
[There is the mantra!: SANTRlMAMAKARMATA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
The three buddha-bodies will be liberated in the space of 
primordial purity, 
While [externally] a clear sky and shimmering rainbow will 
appear. 
To discover the abodes of the Conquerors and their children, 
!There is the mantra]: NALAKHEPAKlLISA. 
[When it is worn at the time of death] 
It will liberate all beings who wear it and are touched by its 
breath, 11 
While [externally] rainbows and subtle relics will multiply. 
How wonderful! 
Since the unified enlightened intention of non-dual 
Samantabhadra and Samantabhadri12 is naturally present, 354 THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THE DEAD 
Each [of these individual mantras] has the capacity to confer 
liberation. 
Thus they are [known as] the twenty-five seminal points, or 
mantra lines, 
In which reality naturally resonates and naturally arises. 
SAMAYA 
[PART TWO] 
How wonderful! 
Then the male and female consorts [Samantabhadra and 
Samantabhadri], having entered into non-dual union, 
Emit multiple male and female emanations, 
From which arises the mary9ala of the hundred enlightened 
families of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities.13 
Within the naturally arising diffusive expanse of the 
enlightened intention of the Forty-two Peaceful Deities, 
Like the sun emerging from the clouds, 
This naturally arising enlightened intention then manifests as 
follows, 
Within the field of experience of fortunate beings: 
0¥ AI.I H0¥ BODHICITTA MAHASUKHA JNANADHATU Al.f is 
the unified enlightened intention of the Forty-two Peaceful 
Deities. 
Thus14 the mass of conceptual thoughts will be liberated in 
primordial purity, 
As an expanse of supreme pristine cognition, 
While [externally] the indestructible sound of these sixteen 
syllables 
And inestimable rainbow lights and relics will appear. 
How wonderful! 
Then the individual enlightened intentions of the Forty-two 
Peaceful Deities naturally arise: LIIIERATION BY WEARING 355 
0¥ HO~t svA A~t HA 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis 15 arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the five male buddhas of 
the enlightened families. 
Thus, the five psycho-physical aggregates will be naturally 
liberated, 
And they will arise as the five pristine cognitions, 
While [externally] five kinds of bone relic will appear 
I following the cremation]. 
MO¥ LA¥ MA¥ PHYA¥ TA¥ 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the five female buddhas 
of the enlightened families. 
Thus, the five clements will be naturally liberated, 
And they will arise inseparably from the five female buddhas, 
While fexternally] five-coloured rainbows will appear. 
0~1 J 1 NAJ 1 K is the enlightened intention of Vairocana. 
Thus the aggregate of form will be liberated in the pristine 
cognition of reality's expanse, 
While [externally] white rainbow lights will shine, 
And five-coloured paiicara'?l relics, indicating attainment of 
the five buddha-bodies, 
Will be retrieved from the heart [following cremation], 
For which reason these are known as the 'supreme bone relics 
of the Tathagata family'. 
HO¥ VAJRADH~K is the enlightened intention of Vajrasattva. 
Thus the aggregate of consciousness will be liberated in the 
mirror-like pristine cognition, 
While [externally] blue rainbow lights will shine, 
And blue-coloured churira'?l relics, indicating an increase in 
enlightened attributes, 
Will be retrieved from the blood [following cremation], 
For which reason these are known as the 'supreme bone relics 
of the Vajra family'. THE TIBETA!'I BOOK Ot' THE Dl:.AD 
svA. RATNADH~K is the enlightened intention of 
Ratnasambhava. 
Thus the aggregate of feeling will be liberated in the pristine 
cognition of sameness, 
While [externally] yellow rainbow lights will shine, 
And yellow-coloured serira'!l relics, indicating the fulfilment of 
all wishes, 
Will be retrieved from the serous fluid [following cremation], 
For which reason these are known as the 'supreme bone relics 
of the Ratna family'. 
A¥ AROLIK is the enlightened intention of Amitabha. 
Thus the aggregate of perception will be liberated in the 
pristine cognition of discernment, 
While [externally] red rainbow lights will shine, 
And red-coloured sarfra'?l relics, indicating attainment of the 
unborn reality, 
Will be retrieved from the flesh [following cremation], 
For which reason these arc known as the 'supreme bone relics 
of the Padma family'. 
HA PRAJNADll~K is the enlightened intention of 
Amoghasiddhi. 
Thus the aggregate of motivational tendencies will be liberated 
in the pristine cognition of accomplishment, 
While [externally] green rainbow lights will shine, 
And green-coloured nyarira1~ relics, indicating the attainment 
of the emanational body, 
Will be retrieved from the marrow [following cremation], 
For which reason these are known as the 'supreme bone relics 
of the Karma family'. 
MO¥ DHATVISVARI is the enlightened intention of 
[Aka sa ]dha rvisvari. 
Thus the appearances of the space [element] will be naturally 
liberated, 
While [externally] piercing white1(; rainbow lights will shine in 
the sky. LIBERATION BY WEARING 357 
LA~t DVE~ARATI is the enlightened intention of Buddhalocana. 
Thus the earth element will be naturally liberated, 
While lexternallyJ piercing yellow rainbow lights will shine in 
the sky. 
MA¥ MOHARATI is the enlightened intention of ~1amaki. 
Thus the water element will be naturally liberated, 
While [externally] piercing blue rainbow lights will shine in the 
sky. 
PA¥ RAGARATI is the enlightened intention of PaQ9aravasinL 
Thus the fire element will be naturally liberated, 
While [externally] piercing red rainbow lights will shine in the 
sky. 
TA¥ VAJRARATI is the enlightened intention of Samayatara. 
Thus the wind clement will be naturally liberated, 
While [externally] piercing green rainbow lights will shine in 
the sky. 
K~l~l MAl H0¥ TRA:yt HRII:I MO¥ THLI:yt Jl¥ 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the Eight Male 
Bodhisattvas. 
Thus the eight classes of consciousness will be naturally 
liberated, 
And arise inseparably from the eight male bodhisattvas, 
While [externally] many subtle relics will appear [following the 
cremation]. 
K~l¥ HI RAJAYA SVAHA [is the enlightened intention of the 
male bodhisattva K~itigarbha]. 
Thus visual consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from K~itigarbha. 
MAl DHARA~I SVAHA [is the enlightened intention of the male 
bodhisattva MaitreyaJ. 
Thus auditory consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Maitreya. 358 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
H 0¥ SA RAJ AYA sv AHA [is the enlightened intention of the 
male bodhisattva Samantabhadra]. 
Thus olfactory consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Samantabhadra. 
TRA¥ A GARBHA YAf:l SV AHA fis the enlightened intention of 
the male bodhisattva Akasagarbha]. 
Thus gustatory consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Akasagarbha. 
HRif:l HA H0¥ PADMABHATAMAf:l SVAHA [is the enlightened 
intention of the male bodhisattva Avalokitesvara]. 
Thus tactile consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Avalokitesvara. 
MO¥ SRI A¥ RAGAYA SVAHA [is the enlightened intention of 
the male bodhisattva Mafijusri]. 17 
Thus mental consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Mafijusri. 
TH Li¥ NISARAM BHAYA SV AHA (is the enlightened intention 
of the male bodhisattva Nivarai)avi~kambhin]. 
Thus the ground-of-all consciousness will be naturally 
liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Nivarar:tavi~kambhin. 
JI¥ KURUPA?;-11 HRil;l SVAHA [is the enlightened intention of 
the male bodhisattva Vajrapai)i]. 
Thus the dissonant consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Vajrapat)i. 
Through these enlightened intentions of the Eight Male 
Bodhisattvas 
The eight classes of consciousness will be naturally 
liberated, 
And diverse, shimmering rainbow lights will appear. tx LIBERATIOI\ BY WEARING 359 
HOtyt HOryt TRAryt JAI;I HRII;I VA~1 HOl;I Al;I 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the Eight Female 
Bodhisattvas. 
Thus mental constructs associated with the eight objects of 
consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
lAnd arise inseparably from the eight female bodhisattvas], 
While [externally], a shower of flowers will fall. 
HO ~~ LASYE SAMA Y AS TVA~1 [is the enlightened intention of 
Lasyaj. 
Thus mental constructs associated with physical form will be 
naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Lasya. 
HOryt PU~PE AVESA lis the enlightened intention of Pu~pa]. 
Thus mental constructs associated with past events will be 
naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Pu~pa. 
TRAtyf MALYE SAMA YA HOl;I (is the enlightened intention of 
Malya]. 
Thus mental constructs associated with apparent phenomena 
will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Malya. 
JAI;I DHOPE PRAVESAYAS TVA¥ lis the enlightened intention 
of Dhupa]. 
Thus mental constructs associated with objects of smell will be 
naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Dhupa. 
HRII;I GITI RAGO'HA¥ [is the enlightened intention of Gita]. 
Thus mental constructs associated with objects of sound will 
be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Gita. THE TIBETAN BOOK Of THE DEAD 
VA~t DIPASUKHINI [is the enlightened intention of Aloka]. 
Thus mental constructs associated with future events will be 
naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Aloka. 
HOf:l GANDHE CITTA HOf:l (is the enlightened intention of 
Gandha]. 
Thus mental constructs associated with present events will be 
naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from Gandhil. 
Af:l N~TI RAGAYAMI [is the enlightened intention of Nart1J.1
"~ 
Thus mental constructs associated with objects of taste will be 
naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from NartL 
Through these enlightened intentions of the Eight Female 
Bodhisattvas, 
Mental constructs associated with the eight objects of 
consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
While [externally], a shower of flowers and sounds of music 
will manifest, as the transfer of consciousness occurs. 
KRI¥ PRA¥ TRU¥ K~A¥ SRU~t YE 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syll..tbles of the Six Sages. 
Thus the six dissonant mental states will be naturally 
liberated, 
The womb entrances of the six classes of beings will be 
obstructed, 
And the Buddha-body of Emanation will continuously 
manifest for the benefit of sentient beings, 
While [externally! manifold subtle relics will appear [following 
the cremation]. 
O¥ MUNI KRI¥ svAHA is the enlightened intention of 
Devendra Sakra. 
Thus pride, the entrance to the god realms, will be obstructed. LIBERATION BY WEARING 
O¥ .MUNI PRA~1 svAHA is the enlightened intention of 
Vemacitra. 
Thus envy, the entrance to the antigod realm, will be 
obstructed. 
0~1 MUNI TRU~1 svAHA is the enlightened intention of 
Sakyamuni. 
Thus desire, the entrance to the human realm, will be 
obstructed. 
O¥ MUNI K~A¥ svAHA is the enlightened intention of 
Sthirasirpha. 
Thus delusion, the entrance to the animal realm, will be 
obstructed. 
O¥ MUNI SRU¥ svAHA is the enlightened intention of 
Jvalamukha. 
Thus miserliness, the entrance to the anguished-spirit realms, 
will be obstructed. 
O¥ MUNI YE svAHA is the enlightened intention of 
Dharmaraja. 
Thus hatred, the entrance to the hell realms, will be 
obstructed. 
Through these enlightened intentions of the Six Emanational 
Sages, 
The entrances to the six imperfect classes of existence will be 
obstructed, 
And the [altruistic] activities of the pure emanational bodies 
will manifest, 
While [externally] shimmering rainbows will appear amidst 
the clouds. 
HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ JAl;l H0¥ VA¥ HOl;l 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these [seed syllables of] the Eight Male and 
Female Gatekeepers. 
Thus, the entrances to the four types of birth will be 
obstructed, THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
And the four immeasurable aspirations will grow within the 
mental continuum, 
While [externally] the four corresponding rainbow lights 
[white, yellow, red and green] will appear [following the 
cremation J. 
0~1 VAJRAKRODHA VIJAYA H0¥ is the enlightened intention 
of Vijaya. 
Thus mental constructs associated with eternalism will be 
naturally liberated, 
And all acts of pacification will be accomplished. 
O,~ VAJRAKRODHA YAMANTAKA H0¥ is the enlightened 
intention of Yamantaka. 
Thus mental constructs associated with nihilism will be 
naturally liberated, 
And all acts of enrichment will be accomplished. 
0¥ PADMANTAK~T HAYAGRIVA H0¥ is the enlightened 
intention of Hayagrivaraja. 
Thus mental constructs associated with egoism will be 
naturally liberated, 
And all acts of subjugation will be accomplished. 
0~1 VAJRAKRODHA AM~TAKU~J?ALI H0¥ is the enlightened 
intention of Amrtakury9alin. 
Thus mental constructs associated with substantialisnr~0 will be 
naturally liberated, 
And all acts of wrath will be accomplished. 
Through these enlightened intentions of the four Male 
Gatekeepers, 
The four extremes, including eternalism and nihilism, will be 
naturally liberated, 
And the four enlightened activities will be accomplished, 
While !externally] the !four] corresponding rainbow lights 
white, yellow, red and green, will appear. LIBERATION BY WEARING 
O¥ VAJ RAN KU sA J Al;l is the enlightened intention of Ankusa. 
Thus the entrance to miraculous birth will be obstructed, 
And immeasurable compassion will grow within the mental 
continuum. 
O¥ VAJRAPASA H0}:1 is the enlightened intention of Pasa. 
Thus the entrance to womb birth will be obstructed, 
And immeasurable loving kindness will grow within the 
mental continuum. 
O}:t VAJRASPHOTA VA¥ is the enlightened intention of 
Sphop. 
Thus the entrance to egg birth will be obstructed, 
And immeasurable sympathetic joy will grow within the 
mental continuum. 
O¥ VAJRAGHA~TA HOI;I is the enlightened intention of 
GaQtha. 
Thus the entrance to birth through heat and moisture will be 
obstructed, 
And immeasurable equanimity will grow within the mental 
continuum. 
[Through these enlightened intentions of the Four Female 
Gatekeepers, 
The entrances to the four types of birth will be obstructed, 
And the four immeasurable aspirations will grow within the 
mental continuum, 
While [externally] the four corresponding rainbow lights 
[white, yellow, red and green] will appear.]21 
Through this expansive diffusion of the enlightened intention 
Of the buddha-mind of the Forty-two Peaceful Deities, 
The aggregate of conceptual thoughts is naturally liberated, 
Causing bone-relics, small relics, and rainbow lights to 
appear.22 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
How wonderful! 
Within the naturally arising diffusive expanse of the 
enlightened intention of the Sixty Herukas, 
Like the sun emerging from the clouds, 
This naturally arising enlightened intention then manifests as 
follows, 
Within the field of experience of fortunate beings: 
0¥ RULU RULU H0¥ BHYOJ:I H0¥ 
This mantra is the unified enlightened intention of the Sixty 
Herukas. 
Thus mental constructs associated with dissonant mental states 
are liberated in primordial purity, as an expanse of supreme 
pristine cognition, 
While [externally] the indestructible sound of the eight 
syllables of the RULU mantra will resound, 
And manifold white fiery lights will shine [in the sky following 
the cremation]. 
How wonderful! 
[Thenj, the enlightened intentions of all the Sixty Herukas 
naturally arise individually: 
HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the Six Male Herukas. 
Thus the six dissonant mental states will be naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from the Six Herukas, 
While (externally] six-coloured flames will appear [during the 
cremation]. 
HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ HO¥ H0¥ 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the Six lsvari. 
Thus mental constructs associated with the six objects will be 
naturally liberated, 
And arise inseparably from the Six Isvari, 
While [externally] six-coloured rainbow lights will appear 
r during the cremation]. LIBERATION BY WEARING 
0¥ MAHA KRODHA MAHASRIHERUKA H0¥ PHAT is the 
enlightened intention of Mahottara Heruka. 
Thus the dissonant mental state of ignorance will be liberated 
in primordial purity, 
While [externally] dark brown flames will spiral to the right 
[during the cremation], 
Unequivocally indicating an irreversible liberation, inseparable 
from Mahottara. 
0¥ BUDDHA KRODHA MAHASRIHERUKA H0¥ PHAT is the 
enlightened intention of Buddha Heruka. 
Thus the dissonant mental state of delusion will be liberated in 
primordial purity, 
While [externally] brilliant white flames will shoot upwards 
[during the cremation], 
Unequivocally indicating liberation inseparable from Buddha 
Heruka, 
[As the deceased will be born in the central Buddha field of the 
Dense Array]. 
0¥ VAJRA KRODHA MAHASRIHERUKA H0¥ PHAT is the 
enlightened intention of Vajra Heruka. 
Thus the dissonant mental state of hatred will be liberated in 
primordial purity, 
While [externally] dark blue flames will shoot towards the east 
[during the cremation], 
Unequivocally indicating [liberation] inseparable from Vajra 
Heruka, 
As [the deceased] will be born in the [eastern] Buddha field of 
Manifest Joy. 
0¥ RATNA KRODHA MAHASRIHERUKA H0¥ PHAT is the 
enlightened intention of Ratna Heruka. 
Thus the dissonant mental state of pride will be liberated in 
primordial purity, 
While [externally 1 dark yellow flames will shoot towards the 
south [during the cremation], 
Unequivocally indicating [liberation] inseparable from Ratna 
Heruka, 
As [the deceased] will be born in the southern Buddha field of 
The Joyful. ~66 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
Oryt I'ADMA KRODHA MAHASRIHERUKA HO~l PHAT is the 
enlightened intention of Padma Heruka. 
Thus the dissonant mental state of desire will be liberated in 
primordial purity, 
While [externally] dark red flames will shoot towards the west 
lduring the cremation], 
Unequivocally indicating [liberation] inseparable from Padma 
Heruka, 
As I the deceased I will be born in the western Buddha field of 
The Blissful. 
Oryt KARMA KRODHA MAHASRiHERUKA H0~1 PHAT is the 
enlightened intention of Karma Heruka. 
Thus the dissonant mental state of envy will be liberated in 
primordial purity, 
While I externally I dark green flames will shoot towards the 
north [during the cremation], 
Unequivocally indicating [liberation] inseparable from Karma 
Heruka, 
As [the deceased] will be born in the northern Buddha field of 
the ~1atrix of Activity. 
0¥ MAHA KRODIIESVARI TVAryt is the enlightened intention 
of Mahakrodhesvari. 
Thus mental constructs associated with apparent phenomena 
will be naturally liberated, 
While [externally] smoke will spiral to the right [during the 
cremation), 
Indicating liberation inseparable from Dhatvisvari. 
0¥ BUDDHA KRODHESVARI TVAryt is the enlightened 
intention of Buddhakrodhesvari. 
Thus mental constructs associated with physical objects will be 
naturally liberated, 
While [externally] smoke will spiral upwards [during the 
cremation I, 
Indicating liberation inseparable from Buddhakrodhesvari. LIIHI{A("IO:'IJ BY WEARI!\G 
0~1 VAJRA KRODHESVARI TV:\~1 is the enlightened intention 
of VajrakrodhesvarL 
Thus mental constructs associated with objects of sound will 
be naturally liberated, 
W'hile r externally I smoke will spiral to the east [during the 
cremation], 
Indicating liberation inseparable from Vajrakrodhesv3rL 
0~1 RATNA KRODHESVARI TVA~1 is the enlightened intention 
of Ratnakrodhesvart. 
Thus mental constructs associated with objects of smell will be 
naturally liberated, 
\X1hilc [externally] smoke \viii spiral to the south [during the 
cremation l, 
Indicating liberation inseparable from Ratnakrodhc5varL 
0~1 PAD~1A KRODHE;VA!d TVA.\;1 is the enJightencJ intention 
of Padmakrodhes\·;,ui. 
Thus mental constructs associated with objects of taste will be 
naturally liberated, 
\Vhile [externally] smoke will spiral to the \Vest [Juring the 
cremation], 
Indicating liberation inseparable from PadmakrodhcsvarL 
0~1 KARMA KRODIIESVARI T\'A~l is the enlightened inrention 
of KarmakrodhdvarL 
Thus mental constructs associ3ted with objects of touch will 
be naturally liberated, 
\Vhile [ cxt<.:rnally] smoke will spiral to the north [during the 
cremation J, 
Indicating liberation inseparable from Karmakrodhesvari. 
Through the expansive diffusion of these naturally arising 
enlightened intentions of the Twelve Principal Herukas, 
The host of mental constructs associated with the dissonant 
statcs will be naturally liberated, 
While thc five buddha ficlds will be mastercd. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
HA IIA HA HA HA HA HA HA 
The mantra-syllables of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the Eight Mataral). 
Thus mental constructs associated with the eight classes of 
consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
W'hile [externally 1 fiery sparks will spiral and shoot to the right 
[during the cremation]. 
O¥ VAJRA GAURI HA is the enlightened intention of Gauri, the 
white female wrathful deity. 
Thus mental constructs associated with the dissonant 
consciousness will be subdued. 
0¥ VAJRA CAURI HA is the enlightened intention of Cauri, the 
yellow female wrathful deity. 
Thus beings of the six classes will be propelled into higher 
rebirths. 
0¥ VAJRA PRAMOHA HA is the enlightened intention of 
PramohJ., the red female wrathful deity. 
Thus beings of the six classes will be steered away from cyclic 
existence. 
o~t VAJRA VET ALI IIA is the enlightened intention of Vetali, 
the dark green female wrathful deity. 
Thus liberation will occur in the enlightened intention of 
um:hanging reality. 
0¥ VAJRA PUKKASi HA is the enlightened intention of 
Pukkasi, the yellowish red female wrathful deity. 
Thus beings will be propelled from dissonant mental states 
[into higher rebirths]. 
0¥ VAJRA GHASMARI HA is the enlightened intention of 
Ghasmari, the green female wrathful deity. 
Thus cyclic existence will be purified, right where it is, 
While lexternally] fiery sparks will spiral and shoot to the right 
during the cremation. LIBERATION BY WEARING 
0~1 VAJRA CA~I?ALI HA is the enlightened intention of 
Cal)~ali, the pale yellow female wrathful deity. 
Thus dissonant mental states and erroneous thoughts will be 
severed. 
O¥ VAJ RA SMASAr-ti HA is the enlightened intention of 
Smasani, the pale blue female wrathful deity. 
Thus the buttresses of dissonant mental states will be severed. 
Through these enlightened intentions of the Eight Matara}:t, 
[The deceased] will be guided out of cyclic existence, 
While [externally J fiery sparks will spiral and shoot forth 
[during the cremation]. 
HE HE HE HE HE HE HE HE 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the Eight Pisacr. 
Thus mental constructs associated with the eight objects of 
consciousness will be naturally liberated, 
While [externally] fiery sparks will shoot forth in chains 
[during the cremation]. 
0¥ VAJRA SI~1HAMUKHI HE is the enlightened intention of 
Si111hamukhi. 
Thus cyclic existence will be purified in its primordial nature. 
0~1 V AJ RA VY AGH RIM U KHI HE is the enlightened intention of 
Vyaghrimukhi. 
Thus cyclic existence will be purified in its entirety. 
O¥ VAJRA s~GALAMUKHI HE is the enlightened intention of 
Srgalamukhi. 
Thus dissonant mental states will be purified from their very 
(OOtS. 
0¥ VAJRA SVANAMUKHI HE is the enlightened intention of 
Svanamukhr. 
Thus the depths of cyclic existence will be churned. 370 THF. TIBETA:-.1 BOOK OF THE DEAD 
0~1 VAJRA G~QHRA~1llKHi HE is the enlightened intention of 
Gr~lhramukhi. 
Thus the three poisons will be severed from their roots. 
0¥ VAJRA KANKAMUKHi HE is the enlightened intention of 
KankamukhL 
Thus beings will be guided from the pit of cyclic existence. 
0~1 VAJRA KAKA~1UKHI HE is the enlightened intention of 
Kakamukhi. 
Thus dissonant mental states will be purified in the creative 
play of [reality's] expanse. 
0¥ VAJRA ULOKAMUKHI HE is the enlightened intention of 
Ulokamukhi. 
Thus the buttresses of erroneous views will be severed. 
Through these enlightened intentions of the Eight Pisaci, 
Mental constructs associated with the eight objects will be 
naturally liberated. 
J AJ:I H0¥ VA~1 HOI;f 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
In the form of these seed-syllables of the Four Female 
Gatekeepers [of the wrathful assembly]. 
Thus the entrances to the four types of birth will be obstructed, 
And the four immeasurable aspirations will grow within the 
mental continuum. 
o,~ VAJRANKUSA JAJ:I is the enlightened intention of white 
horse-headed [Ankusa Vajratejasi]. 
Thus beings will be pulled from the abodes of cyclic existence, 
[And immeasurable compassion will grow within the mental 
continuum]. 
0~1 VAJ RAPASA H 0¥ is the enlightened intention of yellow 
sow-headed [Pasa Vajramogha]. 
Thus erroneous mental constructs will be securely tied, 
lAnd immeasurable loving kindness will grow within the 
mental continuum]. LIBERATIOr-; 13Y WEARI~G 
0~1 VAJRASPHOTA VA~l is the enlightened intention of red 
lion-headed [Sphota Vajraloka]. 
Thus the dissonant mental state of ignorance will be firmly 
bound, 
[And immeasurable sympathetic joy will grow within the 
mental continuum]. 371 
0~1 VAJRAGHA!';~TA HOI:l is the enlightened intention of green 
snake-headed [Gargha Vajravetali]. 
Thus mental constructs associated with the five poisons will be 
subdued, 
[And immeasurable equanimity will grow within the mental 
continuum]. 
BHYO~I BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l 
BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYO~I BHYOI.J BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l 
BHYO~I BHYOI:f BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l 
BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l BHYOI:l 
The mantra-letters of the naturally present causal basis arise 
[In the form of these seed-syllables] of the Twenty-eight Isvari. 
Thus the aggregates of bewildered thought will be purified, 
While [externally] sounds, lights and rays will appear [during 
the cremation]. 
0~1 .MANURAK~ASI BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of 
.Manurak~asL23 
0~1 BRAHMA~I BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of 
Brahmar:ti. 
0~1 RAUDRI BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of Raudri 
0~1 INDRA~I BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of Indrar:ti. 
0~1 KAU~lARI BHYOI:I is the enlightened intention of Kaumari. 
0~1 VAI~~Avi BHYOI;I is the enlightened intention of Vai~r:tavL 
0¥ VAJRA PINGALA BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of 
Vajra [Pir1gala]. 
O¥ SAUMI BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of Saumi. 
O¥ AMf3.TA BHYO~I is the enlightened intention of Amrta. 
O¥ DA~QI BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of Dar:tQI. 
o,~ RAK?ASI BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of Rak~asi. 
0:~1 BHAK?ASI BHYOI:l is the enlightened intention of 
Bhak~asi. 372 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
O¥ RATI BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of Rati. 
0~1 R U DH I RAM AD I BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
Rudhiramadi. 
0¥ EKACARAJ':'Ii BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
Ekacaral)i Rak~asi. 
0¥ MANOHARIKA BHYOI_I is the enlightened intention of 
Manoharika. 
0¥ SIDDHIKARi BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
Siddhikari. 
0¥ VAYUDEVI BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
Vayudevi. 
0¥ MAHAMARAJ':'IA BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
Mahamaral)a. 
O¥ AGNA.Yi BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of Agnayi. 
O¥ vARAHi BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of Varahi. 
O¥ cAMUJ':'IJ?i BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
Camui)QL 
O¥ BHUJ ANA BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of Bhujana. 
O¥ VARU~ANI BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
VaruJ)ani. 
O¥ MAHAKALI BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of Vajra 
Jvlahakaii. 
0¥ MAHACHAGALA BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention of 
Vajra Mahachagala. 
0¥ MAHAKUMBHAKAR~I BHYOJ:I is the enlightened intention 
of Vajra Mahakumbhakari)I. 
0¥ VAJRA LAMBODARA BHYOI} is the enlightened intention 
of Vajra Lambodara. 
Through these enlightened intentions of the Twenty-eight 
lsvari, 
The bewildering apparitions of the intermediate state will be 
naturally purified, 
While [external] signs such as sounds, lights, rays and [bursts 
of] fire and smoke will appear as the transfer of consciousness 
occurs. LIBERATIO!'; BY WEARI!';G 373 
How wonderful! 
The innermost heart[ -mantras] of the Four Great Wrathful 
[~1ale Gatekeepers], 
The subjugators who naturally liberate the four beguiling forces, 
Appear as an uno.bstructed lion's roar, 
Whose naturally arising enlightened intentions resound as 
follows: 
0~1 VAJRA KRODHA KYE~1A KYERI KARIMASTA BHALI BHALI 
ATA EKARASULI BHASATI ENILANILA KA EBINA ABHISI~CA 
This lion's roar which subdues the beguiling force of the 
psycho-physical aggregates, 
[Is the enlightened intention of !\-1ahabala Kumarakalasa]. 
Thus one will dissolve indivisibly in the body of Buddha 
Kumarakalasa, 
And liberation will occur in the naturally present expanse. 
0¥ VAJRA KRODHA MAHAMUDRA JNANA OJASVA H0¥ 
SPHARA~A PHAT SV AHA 
This lion's roar which subdues the beguiling force of the 
dissonant mental states, 
[Is the enlightened intention of Yamantaka Vajra Heruka]. 
Thus one will dissolve indivisibly in the body of Vajra Heruka, 
And buddhahood will then be obtained. 
One will be naturally liberated beyond the boundaries of the 
five poisons, 
And emanations, and their emanations, will bring about the 
welfare of sentient beings. 
0¥ VAJRA KRODHA AM~TAKU~QALI 1-10~1 CHINDHA 
CHINDHA BHINDHA BHI!';OHA HANA HANA DAHA DAHA PACA 
PACA H0~1 PHAT 
This lion's roar which subdues the beguiling force of 'deva 's son', 
[Is the enlightened intention of AmrtakUJ:t9alin]. 
Thus one will dissolve indivisibly in the body of 
Amrtakury9alin, 
And buddhahood will then be obtained. 
One will be freed from the sufferings of the lower existences, 
And enlightened activities will be accomplished in all 
directions, without distinction. 374 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
0¥ VAJRA KRODHA HAYAGRiVA HRII:f SARVA TATHAGATA 
MAHAPANCA 0~1 AYURJNANA MAHAPU~YE TI~THA 0¥ 
This lion's roar which subdues the beguiling force of the lord 
of death, 
lis the enlightened intention of Hayagrivaraja]. 
Thus Hayagrivaraja's accomplishment of long-life will be 
attained, 
And, abiding in the state of reality, which is supreme bliss, 
Ignorance and other dissonant mental states will be uprooted, 
The five poisons will be liberated, right where they are, 
without being renounced, 
And the habitual tendencies of beginningless cyclic existence 
will be swept away. 
lThrough these innermost heart-mantras of the Four Great 
Wrathful Gatekeepers l, 
The four beguiling forces will be destroyed and liberated in the 
four buddha-bodies, 
While [externally J bone relics, minor relics, and rainbow lights 
will appear [during the cremation]. 
[How wonderful! 
Through the expansive diffusion of these enlightened 
intentions of the buddha-mind of the Sixty Herukas, 
The mass of bewildered thoughts is naturally liberated, 
While !externally] sounds, lights and rays, and bursts of fire or 
smoke, spiralling to the right of the pyre, 
As well as rainbow lights, bone relics, and small relics, and 
other signs, will appear.J24 
[PART THREE] 
How wonderful! 
The enlightened intention of the unimpeded Buddha-body of 
Emanation 
Arises as the following six syllables, 
By which the six classes of sentient beings are naturally 
liherated into the expanse [of actual reality]: 
, A A HA SA SA MA LIBERATION BY WEARING 
Through this enlightened intention free from origination or 
cessation, 375 
These six syllables which are the six naturally present seminal 
points [of light], 
Will naturally liberate the six classes of sentient beings within 
the expanse [of realityJ,25 
While [externally], numerous subtle relics and diverse rainbow 
lights will appear [during the cremation]. 
How wonderful! 
The supreme enlightened intention of the Hundred Genuine 
Enlightened Families 
Appears as the secret hundred syllable mantra, 
Naturally arising within the heart of Vajrasattva, as follows: 
0¥ VAJRASATTVA SAMAYAMANUPALAYA VAJRASATTVA 
TVENOPATI~THA D~QHO ME BHAVA SUPO~YO ME BHAVA 
SUTO~YO ME BHAVA ANURAKTO ME BHAVA SARVASIDDHI¥ 
ME PRAYACCHA SARVAKARMASU CAME CITTA¥ SREYAI:I 
KURU HU¥ HAHAHAHA HO BHAGAVAN SARVA TATHAGATA 
VAJRA MA ME MUNCA VAJRABHAVA MAHASAMAYASATTVA 
AJ:I 
Through this unified enlightened intention of the Hundred 
Enlightened Families, 
Degenerations and breaches [of the commitments, and all] 
negativity and obscurations, will be naturally liberated, without 
renunciation,26 
While [externally], bone relics, rainbows, lights and rays will 
appear [during the cremation], 
And sounds will reverberate throughout the universe. 
How wonderful! 
The supreme innermost heart-mantra, unborn and liberating, 
arises in the form of the following naturally present syllables: 
A A I I U 0 ~ i3-~ ~ E A I 0 AU A¥ A ~I. 
These sixteen unborn syllables, in eight pairs, will give rise to 
an indestructible resonance, 
While [externally], they will produce a clear cloudless sky. _p6 THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD 
How wonderful! 
The supreme innermost heart-mantra, unceasing and 
liberating, arises in the form of the following naturally present 
syllables: 
KA KHA GA GHANA CACHA JA JHA NATA THA f?A QHA ~A 
TA THADA DHA NAPA PHA BA BHA MAYA RA LA VA SA ~A SA 
HA K~A 
These thirty-four unceasing syllables, in eight clusters, will give 
rise to an inJestructible resonance, 
\X1hich is the enlightened intention of the unchanging [sacred] 
teachings, 
While causing rainbow lights and r~lics to appear [in the pyre]. 
How wonderful! 
The supreme innermost heart-mantra which liberates the 
enduring continuum [of phenomena] arises in the form of the 
following naturally present syllables: 
(0¥) YE DHARMA HETUPRABHAVA IIETUN TE~A~t 
TATHAGATO HY AVADAT TE~A~1 CA YO NIRODHO EVA¥ VA.Di 
MAHASRA~tA~Af:l SVAHA27 
These thirty-nine liberating mantra syllables, in twelve clusters, 
give rise to an indestructible resonance, 
While [externally] multiplying relics and [shimmering] rainbow 
lights will appear. 
The supplementary mantras which symbolise [the four] enlight­
ened activities and [which are appended to the basic mantras 
above] arise in the form of the following naturally present syllables: 
~1ay diseases, possession by malignant forces, 
And the eight fears, together with all negativity and obscurations, 
Be pacified within the expanse of intrinsic awareness! 
SANTI¥ KURUYE SVAHA 
May the lifespan [of beings] and all the fields of merit 
Be enriched within the modality of [intrinsic] awareness! 
PU~TI¥ KURUYE SVAHA LIBERATION BY WEARI!';G 
~1ay the Three Precious Jewels and all cyclic existence and 
mrvaQa 
Be controlled within the modality of [intrinsic] awareness! 
VASA~l KURUYE SVAHA 
~lay all hostile, obstructing forces, 
The five poisons and the three poisons, 
Be destroyed within the modality of [intrinsic] awareness! 
MARAYA PHAT SVAHA 
May [all] these naturally present enlightened intentions, 
Which arc the unique offspring of all the teachings, 
Naturally arise and manifest for the sake of sentient beings! 
[CONCLUSION] 
Through [the power of] this authentic precious jewel, 
All one's needs and wishes in this life can be manifested, 
And in the next life buddhahood can certainly be achieved. 377 
This [mantra circle] should be accurately inscribed in a headed 
script, 
On a sheet of fine blue paper, 
The size of a four finger-width booklet, 
Using refined gold, the colour of the Buddha, 
And it should be rolled up in silk in the right way.u 
[Then], on the eighth day of the lunar month, 
Coinciding with the constellation Cancer, 
A yogin with pure commitments should consecrate it, 
And then it should be worn [continuously].29 
Inexpressible virtues and negative actions may both greatly 
-mcrease. 
Therefore the [yogin] should persevere in the practice of virtue 
and act for the sake of sentient beings, 
Avoiding even the most minute of negative acts. THE TIBETAN BOOK OF TilE DEAD 
One who does this in the correct manner, 
Even if he or she has previously committed the five inexpiable 
cnmes, 
Cannot possibly fall into inferior existences, once this f mantra 
circle] has been encountered. 
Since even those who have not practised the [sacred] teachings 
at all can attain buddhahood [in this way], 
It is called the 'Liberation by Wearing'. 
Since all who sec this [mantra] circle can attain buddhahood, 
It is called the 'Liberation by Seeing'. 
Since all who touch it can attain huddhahood, 
It is called the 'Liberation by Touching'. 
Since all who hear it read aloud can attain buddhahood, 
It is called the 'Liberation by Hearing'. 
Since all who feel its breath can attain buddhahood, 
It is called the 'Liberation by Feeling'. 
Since there has never been a single buddha who did not see 
[this mantra circle], 
It is indeed the nucleus of the [sacred] teachings. 
All who see it being inscribed will attain buddhahood, 
All who come into contact with it, by wearing it, will attain 
buddha hood. 
All who hear it read aloud will attain buddhahood. 
Therefore, it should be inscribed and worn [as an amulet]. 
It should be read aloud and contemplated in the appropriate 
way, 
And it should be thoroughly comprehended in every respect! 
Except for those fortunate ones, with appropriate past actions, 
[This mantra circle] should be kept secret and concealed, 
Because those who have not accumulated merit cannot 
comprehend [its meaning], 
And if they were to defame this [mantra circle], they would 
proceed to the hells. 
This is like an anguished spirit seeing [nutritious] food as an 
enemy! 
Therefore, it should be kept as a secret, esoteric instruction. 
[This mantra circle] is a field of experience of the fortunate. LIBERATION BY WEARING 379 
It is extremely difficult to encounter this [mantra circle], 
And once encountered, it is difficult to mentally comprehend. 
Therefore, those who do encounter it should rejoice, 
And embrace it with respect! 
At the time of death [this mantra circle] should not be 
removed from the body, 
And when cremation takes place it should not be removed 
from the corpse. 
As a consequence, liberation may occur through seeing, 
hearing, recollection or contact. 
This completes the Liberation by Wearing: Natural Liberation 
of the Psycho-physical Aggregates, 
\X'hich encompasses [the mantras of] the hundred enlightened 
families of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. 
SAMA Y A! rgya rgya rgya a gter-rgya 
This is a discovered text extracted from Mount Gampodar by the 
treasure-finder Karma Lingpa. 
SUBHA¥ Appendix One: Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities and the 
Tibetan Book of the Dead 
A correspondence between the chapters of Karma Lingpa's Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, [entitled} Natural Liberation through [Recog­
nition of/ Enlightened Intention (Dudjom Rinpoche three-volume edition, Delhi: 
Sherab Lama, I975-6) and the chapters of this book 
History (/o-rgyus) 
I) Memorandum (Them-byad zin-bris), composed by Gyarawa Namka Chokyi 
Gyclrsen, Volume r, pp. r-6. 
2) Legend of King 'Gyod tshangs ('Gyod-tshangs rgyal-po'i lo-rgyus). Volume r, 
PP·?-13· 
3) Legend of the Brahmin Dung-phreng (Bram-ze dung-phreng-gi lo-rgyus). 
Volume I, pp. 15-20. 
4) Padmasambhava's Prophecy of the Treasure-finder and the Series of Au­
thentic Spiritual Lineage Holders (gTer-ston lung-bstan-dang khungs btsun-pa 
bla-ma brgyud-pa'i rim-pa-rnams), composed by Gendun Gyeltsen. Volume r, 
pp. 21-26. 
5) Abridged History of the Lineage entitled jewel Garland (rGyud-pa'i lo-rgyus 
bsdus-pa nor-bu'i phreng-ba), composed by Namka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume I, 
pp. 2?-48. 
Empowerment (dbang-bskur) 
I) Natural Liberation through Encountering the Four Empowerments: The 
Extensive and Elaborate Empowerment of the Vase (dBang-bzhi 'phrad-tshad rang­
grol-gyi spros-bcas bum-dbang chen-mo). Volume I, pp. 49-92. 
2) Natural Liberation through Encounterzng the Four Empowerme1Zts: The 
Extraordinary Profound Elucidation of the Three Higher Empowerments Including 
the Natural Liberation Through the Secret Empowerment of Great Bliss (dBang­
bzhi 'phrad-tshad rang-grol-gyi gsang-dbang bde-chen rang-grol-la-sogs-pa'i dbang 
gong-ma gsum-gyi zab-gsal khyad-par-can). Volume I, pp. 93-125. 
3) Natural Liberation through the Propelling of the Six Classes of Beings into 
Higher Rebirth: The /Middle-Length/ Empowerments of the Natural Liberation of 
Degenerated Commitments Through Reparation and Confession (sKong-bshags APPENDIX ONE 
nyams-ch,;gs rang-grul-gyz dbang-bskur gn,;s-spar 'gro-dmg rang-gro/), Volume I, 
pp. I27-I60. 
4) Torma Empowerment: Afcamngful to Touch (gTor-db.mg reg-pa don-ld,;n), 
composed by l\iamka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume I, pp. I61-164. 
5) Natural Liber.Jtl!m through Encounteri11g the Four Empowerments: Flower 
Elucidating the Concluding Seqzwtces (dBang-bzhi 'phrad-tshad rang-grol-gyi rfes­
kyi rtm-pa gsal-ba'i me-tog). Volume I, pp. r65-168. 
6) Natural l.zberation through Connecting with Practical Application: A Sup­
plement to the Middle-length M,zturational Empowerment entitled Natural Libera­
tion of the Szx Classes of Lwing Bemgs (sMm-byed sgo-'byed db,;ng-bskur 'bri11g-po 
"gro-drug rang-grol-la kha-skong phyag-bzhes-kyis brgyab-pa 'brel-tsh,;d rang­
grul). Volume 2, pp. 145-228. 
7) Minor Annotations on the Rites and Empowerments of the Bi11dzng to Hzgher 
Rebtrth (gNas-lzmg-gi cho-ga-dang dbang-bskur sags-/a nye-bar mkho-ba'i 
zur-'debs phran-bu). Volume 2, pp. 229-238. · 
Generation Stage of Meditation (bskyed-rinz) 
I) Spiritual Practice entitled Natural Liberatzmt of Habitual Tendencies ( Clws­
sp)•od bag-chags rang-grul). Volume I, pp. I6<J-200. Sec Chapter 5· 
2) Natural l.iberation of the Nature of A·fmd: The Four-session Yoga of the 
Preliminary Practice (Chos-spyod thun-bzhi'i mal-'byor sems-nyid rang-grol), 
composed by Nyinda Ozer. Volume I, pp. 20I-2I6. Sec Chapter 1. 
3) N,;tural Liberatzon of Degenerated Commitments through Reparation and 
Confession: Prelimin.zry Supplement to the Generation Stage of Ritual Purificatwn 
({sKang-bsh.zgs nyams-chags ratrg-grol-gyi/ Las-byang bskyed-rtm sngo11-'gro lhan­
thabs). composed by Namka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume I, pp. 2I7-2)2. 
4) N,ltural Lzberatwn of Feelmgs: Pnmary Rosary of Ritual Pun{ication accord­
ing to the Assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, in eighteen sections (Zht-khro 
'dus-pa'i las-IJ)•ang rtsa-phreng tshor-ba rang-grul spyi-don bco-brgyad-pa). 
Volume 1, pp. 233-325. 
5) Natur.Jl Liber.ztzon of Feelzngs: Lesser I Ros,;ry of/ Ritual Pzm{ication, in 
three essential sections (Las-byang chung-ba tshor-ba rang-grol snying-fm spyi-dwt 
gszmz-pa). Volume I, pp. 327-352. 
6) Sequence of A!editation on the Peaceful .znd Wrathful Deitzes entitled Coemerg­
ent Przstme Cognition (Zhi-khro sgom-rim lhan-skyes ye-shes). Volume I, pp. 3 53-
367. 
7) Naturall.zberation of Negativity and Obswration through I Enactment of/ the 
Hundredfold Homage to the Sacred Enlightened Families (D,;m-pa rigs-brgyar 
phyag-'tshal sdzg-sgrib rang-grol). Volume I, pp. 369-390. See Chapter 6. 
8) Abridged Homage to the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities (Zhi-khro 'i 
phyag-"tshal bsdus-pa). Volume I, pp. 39I-396. • 
9) Natural Lzherution through Acts of Confession in the Presence of the Peac!/i1l 
u11d Wrathful Deitzes (Zhi-khro'i klcmg-bshags brjod-pa ra11g-grol). Volume r, 
pp. 397-42.9. Sec Chapter 7· 
I o) Naturul LzbcratHm of Degenerated Commitments through Reparatzon .z11d 
Cwzfcsswn: The Seque11ce for the r·ul{ilme11t of Meditutzve Commztments (bsKang-APPENDIX ONE 
bshags nyams-chag rang-grol-gyi thugs-dam bskang-ba'i rim-pa), compiled by 
Namka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume 1, pp. 431-465. 
1 1) Natural Liberation of Degener.1ted Commitments through Rep.zration and 
Confession: The Natural Uheratzon of the Six Classes of Living Beings through the 
Guidance of the Deceased to Higher Rebirth (bsKang-bshags nyams-chag rang-grol­
gyi tshe-'das gnas-spar/ 'dren 'gro-drug rang-grol spyi-don bcu-pa). Volume 2., 
pp. 1-50. 
r 2.) Natural Liberation through Enlightened Activity: The Burnt-offerings of the 
Ritual Pun{ication (Las-bya11g sbyin-sreg phrin-las rang-grol), composed by Namka 
Chokyi Gyatso. Volume 2., pp. 51-I 2.3. 
I 3) Natural Liberation through the Rite of Burnt Offerings: The Sequence of 
the Preliminary Practices (sByin-sreg phrin-las rang-grol-gyi sngon-'gro sta-gon-gyi 
rim-pu). Volume 2., pp. I 2.3-144. 
14) Abndged Notes on Ritual Service Elucidating the Meaning of Liberation 
(bsNyen-yig mdor-bsdus rnam-grol don-gsa/). Volume 2, pp. 2.39-2.53. 
Perfection Stage of Meditation (rdzogs-rim) 
1) Contents entitled 1\:atural Liberation of the Keys to the Chapters (Sa-bead 
lde'u-mig rang-grol gsul-bar bkod-pa), composed by Kyinda. Volume 2., pp. 255-
265. 
2.) Prayer entitled Natural Liberation in the Vast Expanse of the Three Buddha­
bodies (gSol-'debs sku-gsum klong-)•angs rang-grol). Volume 2, pp. 267-2.72. 
3) A Prayer for Union with the Spiritual Teacher [entitled] Natural Liberation 
Without Renunciation of the Three Poisons (sKu-gsum bla-ma'i mal-'byor-gyi 
gsol-'debs dug-gsum ma-spungs rang-grol). Volume 2, pp. 2.73-2.76. See Chap­
ter 2. 
4) Natural Liberation through bzlightened Intention: Guidance to the Experience 
of the Intermediate States: A Supplement on Mental Training in the Preliminary 
Pr..1ctices (Bar-do'i nyams-khrid dgongs-pa rang-grol-gyi sngon-'gro rang-rg)•ud 
'dul-byed-kyi lhan-thabs), a teaching of Choje Lingpa, compiled by Nyinda Ozer 
and redacted by Kamka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume 2., pp. 2.77-302.. 
5) Natural Liberation through the Ground-of-all: A Manual of Guidance to the 
/ntermedzate Stute of This Life (sKyes-gnas bar-do'i khrid-yzg kzm-gzhz rang-grol). 
Volume 2, pp. 303-340. 
6) Natural Liberution through Bewilderment: A Manual of Guidance to the 
Intermediate State of Dreams (rMi-lam bar-do'i khrid-yig 'khml-pa rang-gro/). 
Volume 2, pp. 34 I-361. 
7) Naturul Liberation through Awareness: A Manual of Guidance to the Inter­
mediate State of Meditative Concentration (bSam-gtan bar-do'i khrid-yig rig-pa 
rang-gro/). Volume 2, pp. 363-377-
8) Natural Liberation through Recollection: A Manuul of Guidance to the Inter­
mediate State of the Time of Death ( 'Chi-kha'i bar-do 'i khrzd-yig dran-pa rmzg-gro/). 
Volume 2, pp. 379-400. Sec Chapter 10. 
9) Natural Liheratwn through Vision: A Manual of Gmdance to the Intermediate 
State of Reality (Chos-nyid bur-do'i khrid-yig mthong-ba rang-gro/). Volume 2., 
pp. 401-417-Al'PENIJIX ONE 
I o) N.Jturul l.therutum through Rebirth: A .\I.J111t.1l of Gwd,zna to the bitermedt­
ate St.Jte of Relmth (Snd-p.J bur-do'i klmd-ytg snd-p.1 rung-gru/). Volume 2, 
pp. 419-4_~2. 
Introductions (ngo-sprod) 
1) Preliminary Pructtce for All the Introductions entitled Exhortatum un lmper­
munence, Based on Escurtmg u Corpse to a Cemetery (Ngo-sprod thams-cud-kyi 
sngrm-'gro dur-khrod-du bam-ro bskyal-ba-la brten-nas nu-rtag-pa '1 bskul-mur 
ngo-sprud-pa). Volume 2, pp. 43.3-442. 
2) Introduction to the Origm, Emergence .111d Presence o{ Consciousness, Sup­
ported by the 1-lumun Body, {rum the Cycle o{lntroductions to the Gre,ll Perfect/Oil 
(rDzogs-pu chen-po ngo-sprod-kyt skor-l.1s khams-pa'i mi-mo-la brten-n,ls rnam­
shes 'byung-·,ug-gn,ls gswn-gyi ngo-sprud), redacted by ~amgyel Zangpo. 
Volume 2, pp. 443-467. 
3) Introduction to Awure111:ss: ·:-..:utur,zl LJIJer,ltirm through N.1ked Perception 
(Rig-pa mngon-sum-du ngo-sprod-{JL1 gcer-mthong rang-grol). Volume 2, pp. 469-
488. Sec Chapter 4· 
4) lntroductimz to the Three Ruddha-hodies ;, Accordu11ce with the Great Pcr{ec­
tion: A SufJplement to the Liberation by Heanng (rDzogs-chen sku-gszmz 11go-sj1rod 
bar-du thus-grol-gyi cha-lag). Volume 2, pp. 4X9-493. 
5) Natural I.iher,lfion through Conscwus Awareness: bttru,fuaion to the Stx 
Lamps (sGron-ma drug-gtngo-sprud shes-ng rung-grol). Volume 3, pp. 1-2.0. 
6) Natural Liber<~tton through \'tsion: l11trodudwn by Afe.JIIS of a Cry·stul (Shel­
rdo 'i ngo-sprod mthmzg-h.1 rang·gro/). Volume 3, pp. 21-21l. 
7) Supplemellt to the Introduction to the Inner Radt.Jnce o{ the Ground (gZhi'i 
'ud-gs.Jingo-sprod-kyi lh.Jn-th.Jbs), composed by :--.;amka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume 3, 
pp. 29-J6. 
ll) Introduction by Me,ms of a Butter /.amp (Mar-me'i ngo-sprud), composed by 
Namka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume 3, pp. p-40. 
9) Great l-iberation by fle.1ring; Elucid,ztmg the Introduction to the Intermediate 
State of Re.Jlity ( Chos-nyid bur-do 'i nJ.:o-sprod gsa/-'debs thos-grol chCil-mo ). 
Volume 3, pp. 41-I q. Sec Chapter II, Parts One and Two. 
10) Great Liber.Jtiwt hy Hearing; EluCidating the Introduction to the Intermedi­
ate State of Rebirth (Snd-pa bar-du'i ngo-sprod gsa/· 'debs thos-grol chen-mo). 
Volume J, pp. II s-162. See Chapter I I, Part Three. 
I 1) Supplement to the Teuching Reve.Jimg the N,lfural Expresswn of Vtrtue and 
Neg.Jtii'Ity: An Introduction to the Intermed~<lle St.Jte of Relnrth. entitled Gong of 
Dwme Melody (Snd·fJ.J har-do ·, ngo-s{Jrod dge-sdtg rang-g;:ugs ston-pa 'i lh.Jit-tlhlbs 
dbyungs-sny,m lh.1'i lhan-thabs), composed by Namka Chokyi Gyatso. Volume 3, 
pp. 163-173· Sec Chapter 13, Part Two. 
1 2) N.1tural Liber,zt/011 through Recognition o{the Vtsuullndications and Signs 
of De.Jth ( 'Chi-ltas mtshan-m,l raltg-gro/). Volume 3, pp. 175-204. See Chaptc(S. 
1 3) Nutural Liber.Jtion of fe.Jr through the Rttual Decc{Jtwn o{ Death ( 'Chi-bslu 
'1igs-p,1 r<~ng-gro/) Volume 3, pp. 205-21 R. Sec Chapter 9· 
Lt) Dcuelo{Jing the Gre,lfltess of the Tc.1chmgs of the tiber,ztum by Heurmg 
durmg the lnternzcdt.Jtc St,lfe of Dre.Jms (rhft-I.Jnz bar-do thus-grol chos-kyt chc-h.J 
hskyed-f,ycd), composed by ~yind,1 Ozer. Volume 3, pp. 219-254-APPENDIX OI'<E 
15) Liberatzon by Wearing: Natural l.zberation of the Psycho-physicul Aggre­
gates, in which the fleace{ul and Wrathful Deities are encompassed (Zhi-khro 
'dus-pa'z btags-grol plmng-po rang-grol). Volume 3, pp. 255-286. Sec Chapter 14. 
I 6) An Abridgement of the Liberation by Wearing: Natural Liberation of the 
Psycho-physical Aggregates, entitled Nucleus of Natural Liberation (bTags-grol 
pJnmg-po rang-grol-gyi don-bsdus rmzg-grol snying-po). Volume 3, pp. 287-
306. 
17) Chapter on the Means of Attaching a Diagram which Liberates by Wearing; 
{rum the Tantra of the Great Perfection: Natural Liberation of Cyclic Existence 
and Niml1.za (rDzogs-chen 'khor-'das rang-grol-gyi rgyud-las btags-grul bcang­
thahs-kyi le'u). Volume 3. pp. 307-313. 
1 8) Afemurandum on the Actual Preparation of the Great Chart of the Liberation 
by Wearing (bTags-grol 'khor-lo chen-mo'i lag-len zin-bris). Volume 1, pp. 467-
492.. 
I'}) I nve1ltory for I nsertzon within the Casket ( Glegs-bam bzhugs-pa 'i dkar-chag). 
Volume I, pp. 493-499. 
20) Root Verses of the Six Intermediate States (Bar-do drug-gi rtsa-tshig). 
Volume -'• pp. 316-3 r8. Sec Chapter 3· 
2.1) Aspirational Prayer which Rescues from the Dangerous Pathways of the 
Intermediate States (Bar-do'i 'phrang-sgrol). Volume 3, pp. 318-3 22. See Chapter 
12. 
22.) Aspzratzonal Pr,l)'er which Protects from Fear of the Intermediate States 
(Bar-do'i 'iigs-skyobs-kyz smon-lam). Volume 3, pp. 322-32.5. Sec Chapter 12. 
2. 3) Natural Liberation of Feur: Aspirational Prayer {Calling] to the Buddhas 
and Bodlnsuttuas for Assistance (Sangs-rg)·as byang-sems-rnams ra-mda' sbran-pa'i 
smon-lam 'iigs-pa rung-gro/). Volume 3, pp. 325-327. See Chapter 12. 
Path of Skilful Means (thabs-lam) 
r) Natural Liberation through Desire: Most Profound Quintessence of Guidance 
on Supreme Bliss Pertaining to the Sexual Practices ( 'Og-sgu bde-ba chen-pu 'i khrid 
'dod-chags rang-grol zhes-bya-ba yang-zab bcud-bsdus). Volume 3, pp. 329-419. 
2.) The Means of Estublishing the Lineage by Carrying Desire onto the Path and 
the Means of Closing the Womb Entrances ( 'Dod-chags lam-khyer rigs-brgyud 
h:::hag-thubs-dang mngal-sgo 'gag-thab khol-du phung-ha). Volume 3, pp. 421-
437· 
3) Nutural Liberation through Supreme Bliss: A Profound Abridgement of the 
Guzdance on Supreme Blzss Attained through the Sexual Practices ( 'Og-sgo bde­
chen 'dud-chags rang-grol-g)·i nyams-khrid gud-sbas don-bsdus zab-khrid bde-ba 
chen-po rung-grol zhes-hya-ba shzn-tu zab-pa'i nying-khu), composed by Nyinda 
Ozcr. Volume 3, pp. 439-481. 
Protector Rites (bstan-srung) 
I) Seven Classes ul Oath-bound Protectors, Associated with the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deitzes: Natural Liberation o{ the Venomous Hostzle Malevolent Forces 
and Obstructors through Enlightened Activit)' (Zhi-khro bka'-sru1zg dam-can sde-J86 APPENDIX ONE 
bdun-gyi phrin-las dgra-bgegs gdug-pa rang-gro/), composed by Nyinda Ozcr. 
Volume 3, pp. 483-490. 
2) Seven Classes of Oath-bound Protectors, Associated with the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities: Natural Liberation of Venomous Forces through Reparation 
(Zhi-khro dam-can sde-bdun-gyi mdangs-bskang gdug-pa rang-gro/), Volume 3, 
pp. 491-498. 
The Lotus Peaceful and Wrathful Deities (Padma zhi-khro) 
1) Natural Liberation of Rebirth: A Teaching Revealing the Natural Expression 
of Virtue and Negativity, through the Introduction to the Intermediate State of 
Rebirth (Srid-pa bar-do'i ngo-sprod dge-sdig rang-gzugs ston-pa'i gdams-pa'am 
me-long srid-pa rang-gro/), contained in the Delhi offset edition of the Great 
Liberation by Hearing in the Intermediate States-, pp. 499-533. See Chapter 13, 
Part One. Appendix Two: Symbolism of 
the MaJ)c;iala of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities 
The maQ9ala represents a perfected stare of being, and the central deities within it 
symbolise the perfected states of the meditator's own awareness, psycho-physical 
aggregates, elemental properties, and sensory and mental processes. The peaceful 
deities represent the quiescent natural purity of these fundamental components of 
our being and the wrathful deities represent the transformative aspects of these 
energies, which bring about the natural transformation of the most enduring and 
deep-seated expressions of our mundane perceptual states. Last, the outer deities of 
the maQ9ala represent the modes of activity of an enlightened being. 
The exact mapping of this symbolism docs vary according to the lineage and class 
of the practice. In the chart presented below, the correspondences are based on 
Chapter 5 of the present work, supplemented by correspondences taken from other 
texts within the cycle, with certain common variances noted. The Forty-two Peaceful Deities 
The male and female primordial buddhas: Samantabhadra and Samantabhadri in union represent the indivisible union of pure 
awareness and emptiness 
Samantabhadra 
kwz-tu b:::ang-po 
Samantabhadri 
kun-tu bzang-mo Location 
Centre of the energy centre 
within the he<trt, embracing 
Samantabhadri 
Centre of the energy centre 
within the heart, embracing 
Samantabh<tdra Colour 
Sky blue 
Stainless 
white, 
like 
crystal Symbolising 
The awareness aspect of the Buddha-body of Reality, the 
natur<tl purity of mental consciousness, free from funda­
mental ignorance. 
The emptiness aspect of the Buddha-body of Reality, the 
natural purity of the sensory spectrum of phenomena. 
The five male buddhas: Vairocana, Ak~obhya-Vajrasattva, Ratnasamhhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi, represent the five 
pristine cognitions and the natural purity of the five psycho-physical aggregates 
Vairocana 
rn.un-par 
sn,mg-mdzud Location 
Central ch<tnnel within the 
heart, embr<tcing Akasadhat­
visvari Colour 
Conch 
white Symbolising 
The pri~tine cognition of reality's expanse, the natural 
purity of the aggregate of consciousness, free from 
delusion Enlightened 
f<tmily 
Buddha 
1\: B: In some souru:s, where Ak~ohhya Vajrasattva is placed at the centre of the mat:~~Jia and Vair<>eJna 111 the east (e.g. Lochen 
Dh.1rmasri, SDGG, pp. 81-6), Vairocana symbolises the a~grq~Jte of form. The d1stmction between tht:se positiom 1s rciJtt:d to the 
c!J,s of pra..:tJ.:e- tht· former correspondmg to Atiyoga and the latter to a Mah.\yoga intt:rpretation of the Cuh)'agarbha T.mtru. ~ 
oc 
00 
> 
'":l 
'":l 
(":'1 z 
tJ 
)( 
..., 
~ 
0 (Ak~obhya- )Vajra­
sattva 
mi-bskyod rdo-rje 
sems-dpa' 
Ratnasambhava 
rin-chen 
'byung-gnas 
Amitabha 
snang-ba mtha'-yas 
Amoghasiddhi 
don-yod grub-pa Eo1stern channel branch of the 
heart, embracing 
Buddhalocana Azure 
blue The mirror-like pristine cognition, the natural purity of 
the aggregate of form, free from aversion Vajra 
NB: When plau:J at the centre of the ma1_1~ala, (Ak~ohhya-)\'aJrasattva n:presents the natural purity of the aggregate of comuous­
ness_ See above_ 
Southern channel branch of the Golden The pristine cognition of sameness, the natural purity of Ratna 
heart, embra~.:ing .Mamakl yellow the aggregate of feeling, free from pride 
Western ~.:hannel branch of the Copper The pristine cognition of discernment, the natural purity Padma 
heart, embra~.:ing P<ll)<;iaravasinl red of the aggregate of perceptions, free from attachment 
Northern channel branch of Tur- The pristine cognition of accomplishment, the natural Karma 
the heart, embracing quoise purity of the aggregate uf motivational tendencies, free 
Samayatara green from envy 
The five female buddhas: Akasadhatvisvari, Buddhalocana, Mamaki, Pal)~aravasini and Samayatara, 
represent the natural purity of the five elements 
AkasadhatviSvari 
nam-mkha'i 
dhyings phyug-ma 
Buddhalocana 
sangs-rgyas 
spyan-ma Location 
Central channel, within the 
heart, embracing Vairocana 
Eastern channel branch of the 
heart, embracing Ak~obhya­
Vajrasattva Colour Symbolising 
Moon- The natural purity of the space element 
like white 
Beryl blue The natural purity of the earth element Enlightened 
family 
Buddha 
Vajra 
N B: In Chapter 1 1, 1\uddhalocana is unusually identified with the natural purity of the water element, a role generally anributed to 
the female buddha MamakL > 
-:l 
-:l 
1"'1 z c 
X 
-l 
~ 
0 
'..#> 
00 
\C Mamaki 
yum ma-ma-ki 
Pary<_larav:lsini 
yum-mchog gos-
dkar-mo 
Samayatara 
yum dam-tshig 
sgrol-ma Location Colour 
Southern channel branch of the Minium 
heart, embracing Rarna­
sambhava orange Symbolising 
The natural purity of rhc water element Enlightened 
family 
Ratna 
NB: In Chapter I I, M~makl is unusually identified with the natural purity of the earrh element, a role generally attributed to the 
female buddha BuddhalocanJ. 
Western channel branch of the Fire- The natural purity of the element fire Padma 
heart, embracing Amit;Ibha crystal 
red 
Northern channel branch of Sapphire The natural purity of the element wind Karma 
rhe heart, embracing green 
Arnoghasiddhi 
The eight male bodhisattvas: K~itigarbha, Maitreya, Samantabhadra, Akasagarbha, A valokite5vara, Manjusrikumarabhuta, 
Nivarar:taviskambhin and Vajrapal)i, represent the eight classes of consciousness 
NB: According to the Guhyagarbha Tantra, they also symbolise the four senses and four sense organs. 
Enlightened 
Location Colour Symbolising family 
K~itigarbha Eastern channel branch of rhe Snow- The natural purity of visual consciousness Vajra 
sa'i snying-po heart, ro rhe right of Vajra- moun-
satrva rain white 
Mairreya Eastern channel branch of rhe Cloud- The natural purity of auditory consciousness Vajra 
rgyal-ba bya"{s-pa heart, to the left of Vajrasatrva white -..... 
\0 
0 
> 
'"C 
'"C m z 
0 
X 
--i 
~ 
0 Samantabhadra Southern channel branch of the 
byang-sems kun-tu heart, to the right of Ratna-
bzang-pu sambhava 
Akasagarbha Southern channel branch of the 
nam-mkha'i heart, to the left of Rarna-
snying-po sambhava 
Avalokitdvara Western channel branch of the 
spyan-ras gzigs heart, to the right of Amitabha 
Maftjusrikumara- Western channel branch of the 
bhuta heart, to the left of Amitolbha 
'jam-dpal{gzhon--
nur gyur-pa/ 
[Sarva] Nivarar:tavi- Northern channel bram:h of 
skambhin the heart, to the right of 
sgrib-pa rnam-par Amoghasiddhi 
sel-ba 
Vajrapal)i Northern channel branch of 
phyag-na rdo-rJe the heart, to the left of 
Amoghasiddhi Amber 
yellow 
Burnished 
golden 
yellow 
Coral red 
Minium 
Orange 
Green as 
the night-
flowering 
lotus 
Emerald 
green The natural purity of olfactory consciousness 
The natural purity of gustatory consciousness 
The natural purity of tactile consciousness 
The natural purity of mental consciousness 
The natural purity of the 'ground-of-all' consciousness 
The natural purity of the defiled consciousness Ratna 
Ratna 
Padma 
Padma 
Karma 
Karma > 
'":l 
'":l m z 
0 
X 
o-1 
~ 
0 
...,.. 
\C) ... The eight female bodhisattvas: Lisya, Pu~pa, Malya, Dhupa, Gita, Aloka, Gandha and Narti, represent the four 
sense objects and the four phases of conceptual thought (past, present, future and indeterminate), or 
alternatively the eight objects of consciousness 
Enlightened 
Location Colour Symbolising family 
Lasya The eastern channel branch of Quartz The natural purity of visual phenomt:na Vajra 
lasya-ma the heart, in front of Vajra- white 
sattva 
Pu~pa The eastern channel branch of Pearl The natural purity of past conceptual thoughts Vajra 
pu~pe-ma the heart, behind Vajrasattva white 
Malya The southern channel branch Saffron The natural purity of mdcterminate conct:ptual thoughts Ratna 
malya-ma of the heart, in front of Ratna- yellow 
sambhava 
Dhopa The southern channel branch Golden The natural purity of fragrance Ratna 
dhupe-ma of the heart, behind Ratna- yellow 
sambhava 
Gita The western channel branch of Marsh The natural purity of sound Padma 
ghirti-ma the heart, in front of Amit;lbha mallow 
pink 
Aloka The western channel branch of Lotus The natural purity of future conceptual thoughts Padma 
aloka-ma the heart, behind Amitjbha pink 
Gandha The northern channel branch Poppy The natural purity of present conceptual thoughts Karma 
gh,mdhe-ma of the heart, in front of green 
Amoghasiddhi 
Narti The northern channel branch Marine The natural purity of taste Karma 
nirtt-ma of the heart, behind green 
Amoghasiddhi ...,.. 
\D 
t-o 
> 
"':: 
IT. z 
0 
;;; 
-i 
~ 
0 The four male gatekeepers: Trailokyavijaya, Yamantaka, Hayagrlva and Amrtakur:t~alin, represent the natural 
purity of the four extreme views and four aspects of enlightened activity 
NB: According to Chapter 7, they represent the natural purity of the four immeasurable aspirations. 
Enlightened 
Location Colour Symbolising family ---
T railokyavijaya The channel branch at the White The natural purity of eternalist views and acts of pacifi- Vajra 
khams-gsum eastern gate of the heart, cation 
rnam-rgyal embracing Ankusa 
Yamantaka The channel branch at the Yellow The natural purity of nihilistic views and acts of Ratna 
gshin-rje gshed southern gate of the heart, enrichment 
embracing Pasa 
Hayagriva The channel branch at the Red The natural purity of egotistical views and acts of subju- PaJma 
rta-mgrin western gate of the heart, gation 
embracing Spo~ha 
Amrtaku~~alin The channel branch at the Green The natural purity of substantialist views and acts of Karma 
bdud-rtsi 'khyil-ba northern gate of the heart, wrath 
embracing Gal)~hil > ...., 
...., 
l"M z 
0 
X 
o-j 
~ 
0 
...... 
\0 ...... The four female gatekeepers: Ankusa, Pasa, Spho!a and Ghar)!a, represent the natural purity of the four types of 
birth and the four immeasurable aspirations 
!'JB: Accordmg to Chapter 7, they represent the natural purity of the four extreme views. 
Ankusa 
lc.zgs-kyu-ma 
Pas a 
zhags-pa-ma 
Spho!a 
lcags-sgrogs-ma 
Gha~!a 
dril-bu-ma Location 
The channel branch at the 
eastern gate of the heart, 
embracing Trailokyavijaya 
The channel branch at the 
southern gate of the heart, 
embracing Yamanraka 
The channel branch at the 
western gate of the heart, 
embracing Hayagriva 
The channel branch at the 
northern gate of the heart, 
embracing AmrtakuJ)~alin Colour 
White 
Yellow 
Red 
Green Symbolising Enlightened 
family 
The natural purity of miraculous birth and the immcasur- Vajra 
able aspiration of compassion 
The natural purity of womb birth and the Immeasurable Ratna 
aspiration of loving kindness 
The natural purity of egg birth and the immeasurable Padma 
aspiration of empathetic joy 
The natural purity of birth through heat and moisture, Karma 
and the immeasurable aspiration of equanimity 
The six sages: Indrasakra, Vcmacitra, Sakyamuni, Sthirasif11ha, Jvalamukha and Yama Dharmaraja, represent the 
natural purity of the six dissonant mental states 
lndrasakra 
dbang-pu 
brgya-byin Location 
In the channel branch of the 
energy centre of great bliss at 
the crown of the head Colour Symbolising 
White The natural purity of pride v. 
\,(; 
~ 
> 
'"0 -: 
~ z 
0 
X 
o-j 
~ 
0 Vemacitra In th~ occipital channel at the Green The natural purity of envy 
thag-bzang-ris throat 
Sakyamuni In the 'life force' channel at the Yellow The natural purity of attachment 
shakya thub-pa heart 
Sthirasif!1ha In the energy centre at the Blue The natural purity of delusion 
senge rab-brtan navel 
jvalamukha In the channel branch at the Red The natural purity of miserliness 
kha-'bar-ma bliss-sustaining secret energy 
centre 
Yam a Dharmaraja In the en~rgy centre at the sol~s Black The natural purity of aversion 
gshin-rje chos-kyi of the feet 
rgyal-po 
The Fifty-eight Wrathful Deities 
The six peaceful male buddhas: Samantabhadra, Vairocana, Ak~obhya-Vajrasattva, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and 
Amoghasiddhi are in their wrathful aspects respectively: Mahottara Heruka, Buddha Heruka, Vajra Hcruka, Ratna Hcruka, 
Padma Heruka and Karma Hcruka, who represent the natural transformation of the six dissonant mental states 
Location 
Mahottara Heruka In the central channel branch 
che-mchog he-ru-ka of the skull within the brain, 
embracing Krodhdvari Colour 
Dark 
brown 
Buddha Heruka 
buddha he-ru-ka In the central channel branch Dark 
of the skull within the brain, brown 
embracing Buddhakrodhdvari Symbolising 
The natural transformation of fundamental ignorance 
into pure awareness Enlightened 
family 
The natural transformation of delusion into the pristine Buddha 
cognition of reality's expanse > 
"0 
"0 m z c 
X 
....; 
~ 
0 
~ 
'-0 
VI Enlightened 
Location Colour Symbolising family 
V ajra Heruka In the eastern channel branch Dark blue The natural transformation of aversion into the mirror- Vajra 
b,zdzru he-ru-ka of the skull within the brain, like pristine cognition 
embracing Vajrakrodhisvari 
Ratna Heruka In the southern channel branch Dark The natural transformation of pride into the pristine cog-Ratna 
ratna he-ru-ka of the skull within the brain, yellow nition of sameness 
embracing RatnakrodhiSvari 
Padma Heruka In the western channel branch Dark red The natural transformation of attachment into the pris-Padma 
padma he-ru-ka of the skull within the brain, tine cognition of discernment 
embracing Padmakrodhisvari 
Karma Heruka In the northern channel branch Dark The natural transformation of envy into the pristine cog-Karma 
ka-rma he-ru-ka of the skull within the brain, green nition of accomplishment 
embracing Karmakrodhisvari 
The six peaceful female buddhas: Samantabhadrl, AkasadhatviSvari, Buddhalocana, Mamaki, Pal)~aravasini and 
Samayatara in their wrathful aspects respectively are Krodhe5vari, Buddhakrodhc5vari, Vajrakrodhe5vari, 
Ratnakrodhc5vari, Padmakrodhe5vari and Karmakrodhc5vari, who represent the natural transformation of 
mental constructs associated with the six objects of consciousness 
Krodhesvari 
kru-ti-sva-ri 
Buddhakrodhdvari 
bde-gshegs dbyings­
phyug-mal b~ddha 
kro-ti-svarri Location 
In the central channel branch 
of the skull within the brain, 
embracing Mahottara Heruka 
In the central channel branch 
of the skull within the brain, 
embracing Buddha Heruka Colour Symbolising 
Dark blue The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with the sensory spectrum of pht·nomena 
Red­
brown The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with physical objects [of sight] Enlightened 
family 
Buddha ....... 
\C) 
a-. 
;lo 
"':1 
"': 
I'T1 z 
0 
)( 
-1 
~ 
0 Vajrakrodhesvari In tht· eastern ~.:hanncl branch Pale blue The natural transformation of llll'IHal constructs associ- Vajra 
)'lt1n b.1-dzra kro-ti- of the skull within the brain, ated with objc~ts of sound 
Sl/u-ri embra~ing Vajra Heruka 
Ratnakrodhdvari In the southern channel branch Pale Thl· natural transformation of mental~.:onstructs associ- Ratna 
yum r,ltlla kro-ti- of the skull within the brain, yellow ated with objects of smell 
sva-ri embr.King Ratna Hcruka 
Padmakrodhdvari In the we~tern ch;mncl branch Pale red The natural transformation of mental constructs associ- Padma 
yum pudma kro-ti- oi tht· skull within the brain, ated with objects of taste 
sua-ri embr.tcing Padma Heruka 
Karmakrodhesvari In the northern channel bran~.:h Palt· green The natural transformation of mental constructs associ- Karma 
k,zrma yum kro-ti- of the ~kull within the brain, a ted with objc~.:ts of touch 
sua-ri embracing Karma Hcruka 
The eight Matara~: Gauri, Cauri, Pramoha, Vetali, Pukkasi, Ghasmari, Cal)~ali and Smasani, represent the natural 
transformation of mental constructs associated with the eight classes of consciousness 
Gauri 
ke'u-ri 
Cauri 
tsa 'u-ri 
Pramoha 
pra-mo-hii Location Colour 
In the eastern channel branch White 
of the skull within the brain 
In the southern channel branch Yellow 
of the skull within the brain 
In the we~tern channel branch 
of the skull within the brain Rec.l Symbolising 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
atcc.l with visual consciousness, and the action of 
destroying the conceptual landscape of cyclic existence 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with auditory consciousness, and the action of pro­
pelling the six classes of beings into higher rebirth 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with olfactory consciousness, and the action of 
resisting lthe seductions ofJ cyclic existence > 
'":l 
'":l 
~ 
'Z. 
c:; 
X 
-1 
~ c 
~ 
\0 
'-I Location Colour Symbolising 
Vetali In the northern channel branch Green- The natural transformation of mental constructs associ-
vetali of the skull within the brain black ated with gustatory consciousness, and the action of [sus-
raining recognition ofJ the unchanging reality 
Pukkasi In the south-eastern channel Red- The natural transformation of mental constructs associ-
pu-kka-si branch of the skull within the yellow ated with tactile consciou!>ness, and the action of draw-
brain ing [sentient beings] free from the dissonant realms 
Ghasmari In the south-western channel Green- The natural transformation of mental constructs associ-
ghasmari branch of the skull within the black ated with the mental consciousness, and the action of 
brain consuming [the turning circle of] cyclic existence 
Ca~<;Jali In the north-western channel Pale The natural transformation of mental constructs associ-
gtum-mo branch of the skull within the yellow ated with the 'ground-of-all' consciousness, and the 
brain action of severing erroneous thoughts [at their roots] 
Smasani In the north-eastern channel Blue- The natural cransformarion of mental constructs associ-
dur-khrod-ma branch of the skull within the black ared with the deluded consciousness, and the action of 
brain severing the buttresses of cyclic existence 
The eight Pisaci: Sirphamukhi, Vyaghrimukhi, Srgalamukhi, Svanamukhi, Grdhramukhi, Kankamukhi, 
Kakamukhi and Uliikamukhi, represent the natural transformation of mental constructs associated with the 
objects of the eight classes of consciousness 
Simhamukhi 
se1~g-gdong-1'ha Location 
In the outer eastern channel 
branch of the skull within the 
brain Colour 
Brown­
black Symbolising 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with visual objects, and the action of stirring cyclic 
existence to its depths ...... 
\0 
ex: 
> ..., 
..., 
fTI z 
0 
>< 
--l 
~ 
0 Vyaghrlmukhl 
stag-gdmzg-ma 
Srgalamukhi 
sri-/a gdong-ma 
Svanamukhi 
shva-na gdonK-ma 
Grdhramukhi 
rgod-gdonK-ma 
Kankamukhi 
kang-ka gdong-ma 
Kakamukhi 
kha-kha gdong-ma 
Ulokamukhi 
hu-hl Kdong-ma In the outer southern channel Red 
branch of the skull within the 
brain 
In the outer western channel Black 
branch of the skull within the 
brain 
In the outer northern channel Blue-
branch of the skull within the black 
brain 
In the outer south-eastern chan-White-
nel hranch of the skull within yellow 
the brain 
In the outer south-western Red-black 
channel branch of the skull 
within the brain 
In the outer north-western Black 
channel branch of the skull 
within the brain 
In the outer norrh-eastern chan-Dark blue 
nel branch of the skull within 
the brain The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with sounds, and the action of overwhelming attach­
ment to cyclic existence 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with smells, and the action of purifying dissonant 
mental states in their basic nature 
The natural tram-formation of mental constructs associ­
ated with tastes, and the action of stirring the pit of 
cyclic existence 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with touch, and the action of severing the three 
poisons from their roots 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with mental phenomena, anJ the action of 
extracting [beings] from the pit of cyclic existence 
The natural tramformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with objects of the 'ground-of-all' consciousness, 
and the action of consuming and liberating dissonant 
mental states 
The natural transformation of mental constructs associ­
ated with objects of the deluded consciousness, and the 
anion of drawing [beings] free from the false mentality 
of cyclic existence > 
'":l 
t':'1 z 
0 
>< 
--1 
~ 
0 
\;.> 
\D 
\D The four Female Gatekeepers manifest as Vajratejasl, Vajramogha, Vajraloka and Vajravetalt, respectively representing the 
closing of the doors to the four types of birth and the force of the four immeasurable aspirations 
Enlightened 
Location Colour Symbolising family --
Vajratejasi In the channel branch at the White The force of immeasurable compassion and the closing Vajra 
[Ankusa] lcags- eastern gate of the skull within of the door to miraculous birth 
kyu-ma the brain 
Vajramogha [Pasa] In the channel branch at the Yellow The force of immeasurable loving kindness and the clos-Ratna 
zhags-pa-ma southern gate of the skull ing of the door to womb birth 
within the brain 
Vajraloka [Sphota] In the channel branch at the Red The force of immeasurable empathetic joy and the clos- Padma 
lcags-sgrogs-ma western gate of the skull within ing of the door to egg birth 
the brain 
Vajravetali In the channel branch at the Green The force of immeasurable equanimity and the closing of Karma 
[Gha~!ii] northern gate of the skull the door to birth through heat and moisture 
dril-bu-ma within the brain ~ 
0 
0 
> 
"':: 
"':: 
fTl z 
0 
>< 
o-j 
~ 
0 Twenty-eight lsvari, represent the purification of the aggregates of bewildered mental constructs and 
the enactment of enlightened activity 
The six yogini of 
the east: 
Manurak~asi 
Brahmat;ti 
Raudri 
Vai~t;tavi 
Kaumari 
lndrat;ti 
The six yogini of 
the south: 
Vajra 
Santi 
Am!ta 
Saumi 
Dat;t~i 
Rak~asi Location Colour Symbolising 
In the minor channels of the 
eastern outer courtyard of the 
skull 
In the minor channels of the 
southern outer courtyard of the 
skull brownish 
white 
yellowish 
white 
greenish 
white The activities of pacification 
bluish white 
reddish white 
white· 
yellow 
reddish 
yellow 
reddish 
yellow The activities of enrichment 
whitish yellow 
greenish 
yellow 
blackish 
yellow Enlightened 
family 
Vajra 
Ratna > 
"'0 
-; 
!Tl z 
0 
>< 
-l 
s:i 
0 
~ 
0 ..... The six yogini of 
the west: 
Bhak~asi 
Rati 
Rudhiramadi 
Ekacari~;ti Rak~asi 
Manoharika 
Siddhikari 
The six yogini of 
the north: 
Vayudevi 
Agnayi 
Varahi 
Camu~;t~i 
Bhujana 
Varuna~;ti 
The four yogini 
gatekeepers: 
Vajrll Mahakali 
Vajra Mahachagala 
Vajra Maha­
kumbhakar~;ti 
Vajra Lambodara Location Colour Symbolising 
In the minor channels of the 
western outer courtyard of the 
skull 
In the minor channels of the 
northern outer courtyard of the 
skull 
At the [outer] eastern, 
southern, western and northern 
gates of the skull respectively The activities of subjugation 
greenish red 
red 
pale red 
red 
red 
greenish red 
The activities of wrath 
bluish green 
reddish green 
blackish green 
reddish green 
blackish green 
bluish green 
white 
yellow 
red 
dark green The closing of the four doors to the four types of birth, 
and the enactment of the four kinds of enlightened 
activity Enlightened 
family 
Pad rna 
Karma 
Vajra 
Ratna 
Pad rna 
Karma ~ 
0 
"" 
> ...., 
...., 
("rl z 
0 
:>< 
...; 
E 
0 Notes 
List of Abbreviations 
Dcrge Derge Parkhang xylographic editions, of the Kangyur, Tengyur and Col-
lected Tantras of the Nyingmapa (NGB). 
Disc. gTer-ston, discoverer of concealed teachings (gter ma). 
DR Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol, 3 vols. The most extensive and 
accurate version of Karma Lingpa's revelations (64 texts, 764 folios), a manu­
saipt of Katok provenance, from the library of the previous Dudjom Rinpoche, 
published in photo-offset form (Delhi: Sherab Lama, I975-76), reproduced on 
CD-ROM by TBRC, New York, Ref: 2330-2332. 
GGFTC G. Dorje, The Guhyagarbhatattvaviniscayamahatantra and its XIVth 
Century Tibetan Commentary Phyogs bcu mun se/. 3 vols. Unpublished Ph.D. 
thesis, University of London, 1987. See also The Guhyagarbha Tantra: Dispelling 
the Darkness of the Ten Directtons (forthcoming). 
MTTWL P. Pfandt, MahJy.ina Texts Translated into Western Languages. 
Cologne: In Komission bei E. J. Brill, I98J. 
NA Not available, not extant. 
NGB The Derge xylographic edition of the Collected Tantras of the Nyingmapa 
(rNying-ma'i rgyud-'bum) in 26 vols. 
NK Collected Teachings of the Nyingmapa (rNying-ma'i bka'-ma), compiled 
in I 20 vols. by Khenpo Jamyang, Katok (I 999 ). 
NSTB Dudjom Rinpoche, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fun-
d.Jmentals and History, translated by G. Dorje and M. Kapstein, Boston: Wisdom 
Publications, r 99 I. This volume contains two texts, Gangs-/jongs rgya-bstan 
yungs-rdzogs-kyi phyi-mo snga-'gyur rdo-rje theg-pa 'i bstan-pa rin-po-che ji-ltar 
byung-ba'i tshul-dag-cing gsal-bar brjod-pa lha-dbang gYul-las rgyal-ba'i rnga­
bo-che'i sgra-dbyangs (short title: rNying-ma'i chos-'byung), and the gSang­
s1lgags snga-'gyur rnying-ma-ba'i bstan-pa'i rnam-gzhag mdo-tsam brjod-pa 
legs-bshad snang-ba'i dga'-ston (short title: bsTan-pa'i rnam-gzhag). 
Redisc. Rediscoverer of twice-concealed teachings (yang-gter). 
SDGG Lochen Dharmasri, gSang-bdag dgongs-rgyan, NK, Vol. 76. 
T A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons, ed. H. Ui et a/., 
Sendai: Tohoku University, 1934· This is a catalogue to the Derge xylographic 
edition of the Kangyur and Tengyur. 
TBD Tibetan Book of the Dead (Bar-do thos-grol chen-mo). 
TBD Amdo edition Bar-do thos-grol chen-mo, 303 pages, recently compiled by NOTES 
Khenpo Dorje and published in Hong Kong, in Qinghai Buddhist Texts Series, 
Vol. I (n.d.). 
TBD Delhi reprint Bur-do thos-grol che1z-mo, 5 50 p3ges, Delhi ( 198 5 ). Repro-
duced from a print of the Bhutanese Rinpung Dzong xylograph through the 
agency of HH Dilgo Khycntse Rinpoche. 
TBD Varanasi reprint Bur-do thos-grol chen-mo, I 22 pages, ed. Kalsang 
Lhundup, Varanasi (1969). Handwritten print based on the xylographic edition 
of HH Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, housed at Engon Monastery in Sikkim. 
r Natural Liberation of the Nature of Mind 
r. Tib. gSang-sngags rdo-ne theg-pa'i chos-spyod thun-bzhi'i mal-'byor sems­
nyid rang-grol. 
2.. Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pu ra11g-grol. 
3· The practices concerning death ( "chi-ba) are the analytical meditations on the 
nature of impermanence (anitya). See e.g. Paltrul Rinpoche, The Words of 
My Perfect Teacher, pp. 39-59; Sonam T. Kazi (trans.), Kun-zang La-may 
Zhal-lung, pp. 56-82.; and Sgam.po.pa!H. V. Guenther (trans.), The Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation, pp. 4 r-54· The expression 'starting with' (sogs-la) 
implies that this will lead on to the other analytical meditations concerning 
past actions (karma) and the sufferings of cyclic existence (sal!tSJra). On the 
application of the meditation on death by hermit buddhas who frequent 
charnel grounds in order to meditate in reverse on the twelve links of dependent 
origination (pratftyasamutpada), see Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 228-9. 
4· This description of phenomena accords with the account given by Nago:lrjuna at 
the beginning of his Root Stanzas of the Madhyamaka entitled Discriminative 
Au•areness (Prafl"iJ-nama-malamadhyamakakJrika). See the translation by D. 
Kalupahana, Mlt/amadhyamakakJrikas, Ch. I. 
5. i.e. lacking in skilful means, on which see glossary. 
6. For a description of the eight freedoms (dal-ba brgyad) and the ten opportuni­
ties ( 'byor-ba bcu), see glossary. 
7· On the dissolution of the physical environment (lokadhatu) by fire and water 
at the end of an aeon, see L. Pruden (trans.), Abhidharmakosabl]{i~ya'!'• Ch. 3, 
The World, pp. 475-7, 489-95. 
8. The 'Lord of Death' ( 'chi-bdag) is an epithet of Yama Dharmaraja. Sec 
glossary. 
9· The expression 'irreversible path' (phyir mi-zlog-pa'i lam) refers to the sutras 
of the second and third turnings of the wheel of the sacred teachings, which 
expound the definitive meaning. See glossary under definitive meaning. 
10. Lit. 'accumulations' (Tib. tshoKs). This refers to the accumulation of merit 
(bsod-n.lms), as opposed to the accumulation of pristine cognition (ye-shes). 
See glossary. 
I 1. Tib. mnyam-rdzogs k/ong-yangs chen-po'i rang-bzhm. This expanse of sa'tlle­
ness and perfection is synonymous with the Buddha-body of Reality. See 
Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 2.5 I -2.. 
12. !\jame and form (nanzanipa) together comprise all the five psycho-physical 
aggreg.ues (pafzcaskandhu) of which the mind-body complex is formed, \'iz. NOTE~ 
I). 
I 5. 
I 6. 
17. 
I 8. 
20. 
21. 
22. form (rupa), consciousness (vtinJ1la), feeling (vedamz), perception (sat!zinJ), 
and motivational tendencies (sat!lskJra). See glossary under aggregates. 
The seed-syllable H 0 ~ is that of Vajrasarrva, symbolising buddha-mind. On 
its composition, sec Pahrul Rinpoche, The Words of My Per{ect Teacher, 
p. 272. 
For an illustration depining the crown fontanelle in its relation with the three 
main energy channels and ancillary vessels, see Tibetan Medical Painti11gs, 
p. 34· 
Sec glossary under Hundred-syllable Mantra. 
'Vajra Holder' (vairadh~k; Tib. rdo-rie 'd:.in-pa), here referring to the deity 
Va)rasattva, is a title generally given to accomplished exponents of the Vehicle 
of Indestructible Reality ( Va,rayana). 
This prayer for total union with the deity is repeated below, p. 2 I, at the end 
of the section on union with the spiritual teacher (guruyoga). As to the specilled 
indications of this union, the body size (kJya; Tib. sku 'i tshad) and lifespan of 
Vajrasattva (Jyul?; Tib. tshe) are those of a buddha, on which seeP. Williams, 
MahJyJna Buddhism, pp. I 8 I -4; his retinue (parivdra; Tib. 'khor) comprises 
male and female bodhisattvas, on which sec Ch. 5, p. 68; and his field (k~etra; 
Tib. zhing-khams) is Abhirati on which see Ch. 11, p. 239. for the significance 
of the thirty-two major marks (dvatri'!tsasanmukhapuru~alak~a~za; Tib. 
skyes-bu dam-pa'i mtshan-b:.ang sum-cu rtsa-gnyis), which arc displayed on 
the buddha-body of form (riip.JkJya), sec glossary. 
The initial mantra of the external mary~ala of offerings: o.~t VAJRA BHO,-.u 
A 1_1 110 ~ indicates that the foundation or base of the symbolic ma•~0ala is of 
the nature of indestructible reality (vaJra; Tib. rdo-rie). Simultaneously, the 
practitioner sprinkles consecrated substances upon it. See Paltrul Rinpoche, 
The Words of My Perfect Teacher, p. 287; and Sonam T. Kazi (trans.), Kun­
za,zg La-may Zhal-lung, p. 400. 
The foundation of the mandala IS considered to be an immensely thick inde­
structible circle of wind, r~~ting upon space, and surmounted by a circle of 
water and a sphere of gold. Sec L. Pruden (trans.), Abhidharmakosubha~yat~z, 
Ch. 3, The World, pp. 451-2. 
The second mantra of the mary<;J.1Ia of offerings: o,~ VAJRA REKHE AI.I HO~ 
indicates that the cakrut'J,_fa or 'perimeter wall' of the mary~<lla is of the nature 
of indestructible reality. Simultaneously, the practitioner makes a clockwise 
circular motion with the right hand, and places a flower blossom on the surface 
of the mary<:Jala, followed by the outer ring. Sec Pahrul Rinpochc, The Words 
of My Perfect Teacher, p. 287; and Sonam T. Kazi (trans.), Kun-zang La-may 
Zhal-lung, pp. 400-40 I. 
On the pen.:cption of the sun (sllrya; Tib. nyi-nza) and moon (wndra; Tib. 
zla-ba) from the perspective of Abhidharma, see L. Pruden (trans.), Ahhidhar­
makosabhJ~ym~z, pp. 460-62; and R. Kloetzli, Buddhist Cosmology, pp. 45-
6. Rahu (sgra-gcan) and Ketu (dus-me) arc identified as the ascending and 
descending phases of the moon. 
The syllables o~ A~ HO~ respectively symbolise buddha-body, speech and 
mind, for which reason, in the context of the present work, they frc4uently 
appear at the beginning of verses as an invocation. See Ch. 5, pp. 67ff. The 
three verses '"·h1ch follow respectively concern the outer, inner, and secret 406 NOTES 
mar:t~ala of offerings which are made respectively to the Buddha-body of 
Emanation (11irmd1_takaya), the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource (sambho­
gakJyu), and the Buddha-body of Reality (dharmakaya). On the construction 
of these three ma•?~alas, see Paltrul Rinpoche, The Words of My Perfect 
Te.1cher, pp. 288-95; and Sonam T. Kazi (trans.), Kun-za11g La-may Zh..z/­
lung, Pt. 2, pp. 403-4. 
23. The ultimate nature of mind (sems-nyid) is identified with the Buddha-body 
of Reality (dharm..zkaya). for a detailed introduction to the nature of mind, 
within the wntext of the present work, see Ch. 4, pp. 3 8-57. 
24. The concluding mantra of the mar:t~ala of offerings o~t Al:l HO~t MAHA GURU 
DEVA l;>AKINI RATNA MA~J?ALA POJA MEGHA A HO~ indicates that a cloud 
of offerings is presented to the precious mar:t9ala of the spiritual teachers, 
meditational deities, and 9akinis. 
2 5. The spiritual teachers of the core lineage who are connected with this trans­
mission ( 'brel-tshad do11-/Jan rtsa-brgyud bla-ma-mams) are those in success­
ive generations who have maintained the lineage of our text from the time of 
Nyinda Ozer down to the present. See 'A Brief Literary History', pp. xxxvi­
xlviii. 
26. The biographies of the important figures in the lineage of the oral transmission 
(bka'-brgyud) related to the teachings of the Nyingma school, are outlined in 
Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 601-739· 
27. The strict vows made in the past (s11gon-gyi dam-bca' gnyan-po) are those 
taken by buddhas and bodhisatrvas in former lives penaining to the propa­
gation of the Buddhist teaching and the bodhisattva vow to remove the suffer­
ings of all beings. See e.g. P. Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, pp. 49-54· 
2.8. Listed among the eighty minor marks (asftya11uvyar,;ana), the Brahma-like 
voice (tshangs-pa 'i gsung) refers to one of the six modes of buddha-speech. 
See Longchen Rabjampa, GGfTC, pp. 703-4. 
29. On the concept of cyclical time, see L. Pruden (trans.), Abhidh..zrmakosabha­
~ya'~'· Ch. 3, The \X'orld, pp. 475-95; R. Kloetzli, Buddhist Cosmology, 
pp. 73-5. Each great aeon (muhakalpa) of cyclical time is said to wmprise the 
four eras of creation (vwartakalpa), duration (vivartasthayikulp.I), dissolution 
(sm~wartakalpa), and non-Juration (sa1!1Vartasthayikalpa). The expression 
'tinal era' (dus-mtha') refers to the period of dissolution. 
30. On this conferral of the four empowerments, namely: the vase empowerment 
(bum-dbang), the secret empowerment (gsang-dbang), the empowerment of 
pristine cognition (shes-rab ye-shes-kyi dbang) and the fourth empowerment 
of indivisible cocmergence (dbyer-med lhan-skyes dba11g bzhi-pa) which 
respectively confer the accomplishment of buddha-body (sku-yt dngos-grub), 
the accomplishment of buddha-speech (gsung-gi dngos-grub), the accomplish­
ment of buddha-mind (thugs-kyi dngos-grub), and the combined accomplish­
ment of buddha-body, speech and mind (sku-gsu11g-thugs-kyi dngos-grub), see 
Paltrul Rinpoche, The Words ol My Perfect Teacher, pp. 3 29-30; and Sonam 
T. Kazi (trans.), Ku11-za11g La-may Zhal-lung, Pt. 2, pp. 462-5. NOTES 
2 A Prayer for Union with the Spiritual Teacher 
1. T1b. sl\u-gsum b/a-ma 'i mal-'byor gsol-'debs dug-gsum ma-spmzg rang-grol. 
2.. Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grul . 
.3· The specific blessing which anses from the Buddha-body of Reality (chos-sku'z 
byin-rlab) is 'primordially pure' (ka-dug), mdicatmg that m this context the 
Buddha-body of Reality is directly realised through the Atiyoga practice called 
'Cutting through Resistance to primordial purity' 1ka-dag khregs-chod), on 
which see Ch. 4; also DudJom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 335-7. 
4· This blessing is 'spontaneously present' (/hun-grub), indicating that the 
Buddha-body of Perfel:t Resource is directly realised through the Atiyoga 
practice called 'All-surpassing Realisation of spontaneous presence' (/hun-grub 
thod-rgal). See Dud1om Rinpoche, ~STB, pp. 337-45. 
5. The prist me cognition of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, here referred 
to as 'naturally liberated in supreme bliss' (bde-chen rang-gro/), comprises the 
mirror-like pristine cognition (Jdarsajtidna), the pristine cognition of sameness 
(samataJizana), and the pristine cognition of discernment (pratyaue­
k~anajtitm,l). See glossary under pristine cognition. 
6. The pristine cognition referred to here is the pristine cognition of the Buddha­
body of Emanation, otherwise known as the pristine cognition of accomplish­
ment (krtyupasthdnajndna). See glossary under pristine cognition. 
7. The natural pristine cognition (rang-byung ye-shes) of the three buddha-bodies 
in union refers to the unity of all the five aspects of pristine cognition (pati­
cajtidna). 
8. On the bodhisattva's altruistic aspiration not to enter nirv~J)a until all sentient 
beings have been liberated from cyclic existence (s .. u?tsdra), see P. Williams, 
Mahd)•dna Buddhzsm, pp. 49-54· 
3 Root Verses of the Six Intermediate States 
r. Tih. Bar-do rnum-drug-gi rtsa-tshig. These verses arc re1rer .ned in the context 
of other chapters of this cycle, e.g. Ch. 10, p. 205, and Ch. 11, pp. 235 and 
2.88. 
2.. Chs. 1-7 of the present text relate to the intermediate state of living, including 
the intermediate states of dreaming and meditative concentration. 
_,. Chs. 8-Io of the present text relate to the intermediate state of the time of 
death. 
4· The intermediate state of reality is the subject of Ch. 1 I. 
~. The intermediate state of rebirth is the subject of Chs. I 1 and 13. 
4 Natural Liberation through Naked Perception 
1. Tib. Rig-pa ngo-sprod ?,Cer-mthong rang-grol. 
2.. Tib. Zab-chos zl11-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
3. The poinr is that all the inestimable 84,000 aspects of the sacred teachings, 
the nine vehicles, the three or four pi!uka, and so forth, depend upon the 40H NOTES 
primary understanding of intrinsic awareness. Cf. Lankavatdrasutra, Ch. 2, v. 
202: 'As long as sentient beings manifest, there will be no end to the vehicles. 
When the mind becomes transformed, there is neither vehicle nor mover.' 
4· The Tibetan expression tshig gsum (lit. 'three words') is used colloquially to 
mean 'terse' or 'in few words'. Two alternative readings have been suggested: 
1) The phrase 'three words' could refer to the three statements given on 
pp. 41-2, that 'past thoughts are traceless, clear and empty', that 'future 
thoughts are unproduced and fresh', and that 'the present moment abides 
naturally and unconstructed'. 2) A less likely view is that this expression may 
refer to the Atiyoga testament of Prahevajra (Tib. dGa'-rab rdo-rje), entitled 
Three Points which Penetrate the Essential (tshig-gsum gnad-du brdeg-pa). 
The three points contained in this latter work crystalise the process through 
which intrinsic awareness (rang-rig) is introduced. They are as follows: the 
'direct introduction to the essence itself' (ngo-rang thog-tu 'phrod-pa), the 
'direct determination of this unique state' (tJ?ag-gcig thog-tu bcad-pa), and the 
'direct confidence in liberation' (gdeng-grol thog-tu bca'-ba). for the original 
text, see Bi-ma sNying-tbig, Pt. 1, Vol. Ga, pp. 304-18, and Parrul Rinpoche's 
ninerernth-century commentary entitled mKhas-pa 'i shri rgyal-po mkhas-chos. 
The background to the revelation of Prahevajra's testament is given in Dudjom 
Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 490-94. 
5· This verse derives from the Guhyagarbha Tantra, Ch. 13, v. 2: There are those 
of no understanding,/ And those of wrong understanding,/ Those of partial 
understanding,/ And those who have nor [quire] understood genuine reality. 
As explained by Longchen Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 988-97, those of no 
understanding (ma-rtogs-pa) are ordinary persons who adhere to the 'vehicles 
of gods and humans' (devamanu~yayana), striving after excellence and higher 
rebirths within cyclic existence (sa'?fsdra) through the practice of virtue. Those 
of misunderstanding (/og-rtogs-pa) comprise the eternalistic and nihilistic 
extremist philosophers of ancient India, who adhere to the Nyayayika, Vai­
~I)ava, Saq1khya, Vaise~ika, and Barhaspatya standpoints. Those of partial 
understanding (phyogs-tsam rtogs-pa) comprise the pious attendants (sravaka) 
who realise the selflessness of the individual person (pudgalanairatmya) but 
fail to realise the selflessness of phenomena (dhamwnairatmya), and the hermit 
buddhas (pratyekabuddha) who additionally realise the lack of inherent exist­
ence (niJ!svahhavatd) with respect to external material phenomena, but fail to 
realise the lack of inherent existence in internal mental phenomena. Lastly, 
those who do not quite understand genuine reality (yang-dag ii-bzhin-nyid-du 
ma-rtogs-pa) comprise the adherents of the causal vehicles, who maintain the 
views of Cittamarra and Madhyamaka, realising respectively that phenomena 
are extensions of consciousness and that all phenomena, whether external or 
internal, arc without inherent existence; yet not quite understanding that 'all 
things are identical in primordial buddhahood', or that 'neither renunciation 
nor acceptance is required because dissonant mental states themselves arise as 
pristine cognition'. At the same time, all these types are said to be 'meagr:,e in 
their skilful means (updyakausalya)' and they 'accomplish their results' with 
difficulty and toil over a long period of time'. Longchen Rabjampa concludes 
that only the adherents of the resultant vehicles (phalayana) perceive genuine 
reality as it is, and among these, only Ariyoga is stated to be the 'naturally 
secret truth' (rmzg-hzhin gsang-ba'i don), while Kriyatantra and Ubhayatantra NOTES 
are referred to as 'disciplines' ('dul-ba), Yogatantra as 'enlightened intention' 
(dgongs-pa), and Mahayoga as 'secrecy' (gsang-ba). These diverse classifi­
cations of Buddhist practitioners and vehicles arc identified, one by one, in the 
following verses. For the Nyingma perspective of the non-Buddhist views 
'of wrong understanding' (/og-rtogs-pa) mentioned above, see also Dudjom 
Rinpoche, NSTB, pp 64-7. 
6. On the classifications of those ordinary persons 'of no understanding' (ma­
rtogs-pa) who adhere to the 'vehicles of gods and humans' (deuamanzt~yayiina), 
sec Dudjom Rinpochc, NSTB, pp. 57-64. 
7. The 'partial absence of self' (phyogs-tsam bdag-med) is that aspect of 
selflessness comprehended by pious attendants and hermit buddhas. Sec gloss­
ary under selflessness. 
8. This passage, in which the texts (gzhung) and philosophical systems 
(siddhanta; Tib. grub-mtha') of the diverse Buddhist schools are said to inhibit 
the perception of inner radiance, corresponds doscly to a well-known quota­
tion from the Tantra of the All-accomplishing King (Kun-byed rgyal-po 'i 
rgyud, T 828), for a translation of which, see Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, 
pp. 29 5-7. The Buddhist and non-Buddhist spiritual and philosophical systems 
(siddhant.J) are rhe subject of derailed analysis in many specialist treatises, 
among which the Nyingma presentations relevant to our present text include 
Longchen Rabjampa 's Treasury of Spiritual and Philosophical Systems (Grub­
mtha' mdzod), and Dudjom Rinpochc's Fundamentals of the Nyingma School 
(bsTan-pa'i rnam-gzhag). 
9· According to the often-cited passage from the Tantra of the All-accomplishing 
King (Kun-byed rgyal-po'i rgyud, T 828) mentioned above, the weaknesses 
(gol-sa) of these three outer classes of tantra are respectively: maintaining the 
subject-object dichotomy in relation to purity (Kriyatantra), maintaining the 
duality of view and conduct (Ubhayatamra), and maintaining acceptance and 
rejection in relation to meditation (Yogatantra). In the present context, these 
are all subsumed in the weakness of excessive attachment to the so-called 'four 
branches of ritual service and attainment' (bsnyen-sgrub yan-lag hzhi), on 
which see the glossary. 
ro. The inner tantras of skilful means (n.:mg-pa thabs-kyi rgyud), which are the 
subject of the present verse, are those of Mah:lyoga, Anuyoga, and Atiyoga, 
for a detailed discussion of which, see Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 273-345, 
3 57-7 2. Of these inner tantras of skilful means, only Atiyoga is considered to 
be free from weaknesses, while the Tantra of the All-accomplishing King 
(Kun-byed rgya/-po'i rgyud) refers to the weakness in Mahayoga as 'excessive 
perseverance with regard to ritual service and attainment' (seuasiidhana); and 
to the weakness in Anuyoga as 'the duality of pure expanse or space' (dag-pa'i 
dbyings) identified with Samanrabhadri, and of pristine cognition or awareness 
(jnana), which is identified with Samanrabhadra. See NSTB, pp. 29 5-7. In 
the context of the present verse, these weaknesses are both subsumed in the 
dualistic notion of 'space and awareness' (dbyings-rig). 
r r. Our text at this point has the reading: gdams-ngag gdams-ngag ('oral teaching, 
oral teaching'). The meaningful reading: gang-zag bdag-med ('selflessness of 
the individual') is suggested by Zenkar Rinpoche. 
r 2. The elimination of the dichotomy between 'singularity' (gcig) and 'multiplicity' 
(du-ma) is the subject of one of the great axioms of Madhyamaka dialectic, 410 NOTES 
known as the 'absence of the singular and the multiple' (gcig-dang du-bra[), 
on which see .M. D. Eckel, }fzanagarbha"s Comment.lr)' on the Dzstinction 
between the Two Truths, pp. 8o-8 5. 
1 3· The innate presence of intrinsic awareness, without need for the elaborations 
of view (/ta-ba), meditation (sgom-pa), conduct (sflyod-pa), or result ('bras­
bu), as expounded in these verses, is dearly discussed in the Atiyoga texts of 
Cutting through Resistance (khregs-chod). See e.g. Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, 
p. 335· 
14. The adopting of these four media (thig-bzhi) is comparable to reaching the 
limits of awareness by the three presences (sdod-pa gsum), or the revealing of 
the limits of liberation by means of the four assurances (gdeng-bzhi), which 
consolidate the practices of the Great Perfection. On these Atiyoga terms, sec 
Dudjom Rinpochc, NSTB, p. 343· 
I 5. The riveting of these four nails (gzer-bzhi) is comparable to that of the three 
attainments (thob-pa gsum), which consolidate the practices of the Great 
Perfection. See Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, p. 343· 
I 6. The two extremes of which the view is free arc open and closed or high and 
low perspectives; the two extremes of which medl[ation is devoid are hope 
and doubt; the two extremes of which conduct is free are renunciation and 
acceptance; and the two extremes of which the result is free are beginning and 
end. These eight extremes may be reduced to six by omitting the category of 
the result. 
17. On the view of vacuous emptiness (stong-pa phy,ll-ba) maintained hy non­
Buddhists, see Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 62-4, 66-7; and for a detailed 
discussion, the purpose of which is to indicate that the Buddhist view of 
emptiness is neither vacuous nor nihilistic, see ibid., pp. I 78-2 I 6. 
I 8. The nature of the delusion (gti-mug), drowsiness ( 'thib-pa), and agitation 
(rgod-pa), which obstruct the clarity of meditations such as calm ahiding 
(samatha), is discussed in L. Pruden (trans.), AbiJidharmakosabha~ya'!l· Ch. 5, 
The Latent Defilements, pp. 767-868, and Ch. 8, The Absorptions, pp. I 21 s-
82. 
19. Existence and non-existence (yud-med g,mg-du ma-gmb) form one binary 
subset within the four-point set (catu~kori) of propositions which are negated 
hy NagJrjuna in the Root Stanzas of the Madhyamaka entztled Discrimmative 
Awareness (Prajfla-nama mulamadhyamaka-karika, T 3824). Sec D. Kalupah­
ana (trans.), Mlllamadhyamakakarikas. 
20. On the controversy concerning the emptiness which is devoid of virtuous and 
negative actions (stong-pa-nyid-la dge-sdtg yul-ma grub), see the discussion on 
the view of the Great Perfection in NSTB, pp. 896-9 IO. 
21. The lives of the future treasure-finders (gter-ston) predicted by Padma­
sambhava, including that of Karma Lingpa, the treasure-finder associated \Vith 
our present text, are recounted in ~STB, pp. 7 50-88o, and on the prophecies 
found in the treasure-doctrines, ibid., pp. 934-5. On Karma Lingpa, see also 
'A Brief Literary History', pp. xxxvi-xlviii. NOTES 411 
5 Natural Liberation of Habitual Tendencies 
1. Tib. Chos-spyod bag-chags rang-grol. 
2. Tib. Z.1b-chos zhi-khro dgungs-pa rang-grot. 
3· Samantabhadra (kzm-tu lnung-po) and .Mahottara (che-mchog) respectively 
represent the peaceful and wrathful aspects of the Buddha-body of Reality 
(dharmakayu). 
4· The first of these mantras: 0¥ A':f H0¥ BODHICITTA MAHASUKHAJNANA 
DH ATU A ':f is the unified enlightened intention of the forty-two peaceful deities. 
See below, Ch. q, p. 354· The second mantra: 0¥ RULU RULU HO~t BHYO~I 
H C ~~ is the unified enlightened intention of the fifty-eight wrathful deities. See 
Ch. I 4· p. 364. 
5. Whereas the description of Vajrasattva given above, Ch. I, pp. I 5-I 6, focuses 
on the purificatory function of Vajrasattva, the present passage provides the 
formal description (abhis.Jmaya; Tib. mngon-rtogs) for the visualisation of 
Vajrasattva, according to the generation stage (utpattikrama) of meditation. 
6. For an explanation, see glossary under Hundred-syllable Mantra. 
7. These comprise the ten male and female buddhas along with the sixteen male 
and female bodhisattvas. See Appendix Two. 
8. An inserted annotation in the text adds that if this aspirational prayer is recited 
on behalf of a dece.1sed person, the word 'we' should, on each occurrence, be 
replaced with 'the deceased'. 
9· The level of Samamabhadra is the sixteenth buddha level, otherwise known 
as the Level of Unsurpassed Pristine Cognition (ye-shes bla-ma). 
I o. This and the following itJlicized verses are extracted from the As pi rational 
Pruyer winch Rescues {rom the Dangerous Pathways of the lntermedzate 
States. See Ch. 12, pp. 3 1 o-1 3. 
1 1. The four pristine cognitions combined are the first four of the five pristine 
cognitions, omitting the pristine cognition of accomplishment. Sec glossary. 
On the reason fur the omission of the pristine cognition of accomplishment, 
see Ch. II, p. 249. 
r 2. The occipital channel, which resembles the horn of an ox, is adjacent to the 
energy centre of perfect resource at the throat (mgrin-pa longs-spyod-kyi 
'khor-/o) of the subtle body. 
I 3· The 'life-force' channel, which resembles a crystal tube, otherwise known as 
k..Ittk.l, is adjacent to the heart-centre (snying-ga chos-kyi 'khor-lo) of the 
subtle body. 
q. The bliss-sustaining secret place (gsang-b.J bde-skyong-gi 'khor-lo) is located 
at the genitalia of the subtle body. 
I 5· The ornaments (rgyan) worn by the peaceful deities include the five silks 
(dar-g)'i chas-gos lnga), i.e. scarves, pendants, blouse, skirt, and sleeves; and 
the eight jewels, i.e. crown, earring, throat necklace, shoulder ornament, mid­
length necklace, long necklace, bracelets and anklets. On the symbolism of 
these ornaments, secT. Norbu, The Small Golden Key, pp. 77-8. 
16. Tib. /han-skyes ye-shes. 
I 7· Tib. khrag-'thung lha-tshogs. A synonym for herukas or wrathful deities. 
18. Tib. gnas-kyi ke 'u-ri-ma ma-mo brgyad. Here gnas is equivalent to the eight 412 NOTES 
classes of consciousness (mam-shes tshogs-brgyad). See Longchen Rabjampa, 
GGFTC, p. I I70. 
I9. Tib. mthing-nag. DR, p. 188. I. 6 reads mthing-skya, but see Ch. 6, p. 107, 
and Ch. I 1, p. 264. 
20. Tib. yul-bJ.zg slng-ha phra-men brgyad.The eight sensory objects are the 
objects of the wrresponding eight classes of wnsciousness. See Longchen 
Rabjampa, GGFTC, p. 1170. 
21. These four female Gatekeepers of the wrathful assembly also have distinct 
names: the wrathful counterpart of Ankusa is Vajratejasi, of Pasa VajramoghJ, 
of Spho~a Vajraloka, and of Ghary~a Vajravetali. 
22. This and the following verse concern the assembly of the twenty-eight isvarl 
(dbang-phyug-ma nyer-brgyad) on the outermost rings of the wrathful 
mar:t<;fala, who are collectively referred to as the 'emanational enactors of the 
four rites of enlightened activity'. Among these, the six yogin! from the east 
who enact the white rites of pacification (shar;nas zhi-ba ·; las-mdzad rna/-'byor 
dbang-phyug drug) arc sometimes depicted holding a vajra in addition to their 
individual hand-emblems, indicating that they belong to the retinue of Vajra 
Heruka in the east. Among them, Manurak~asl in Ch. 5 is simply described as 
'white' (dkar-mo) and inCh. I I as 'dark brown' (smug-nag). Also, inCh. 1 I, 
Brahmaryi is erroneously des<..:ribed as 'red-yellow' (dmar-se), Kaumari as solely 
red (dmar-mo), and Vai~ryavi as solely 'blue' (sngon-mo). 
23. Vajra is also known as Pit'lgala. See Ch. I 1, p. 265. 
24. The six yogin I from the south who enact the yellow rites of enrichment (/ho-nas 
rgyas-pa ·; las-mdzad rna/-'byor dbang-phyug drug) are sometimes de pined 
holding a jewel in addition to their individual hand-emblems, indicating that 
they belong to the retinue of Ratna Heruka in the south. 
2 5. The six yogin I from the west who enact the red rites of subjugation (nub-11as 
dbang-gl las-mdzad mal-'byor dbang-phyug drug) are sometimes depicted 
holding a lotus in addition to their individual hand-emblems, indicating that 
they belong to the retinue of Padma Heruka in the west. Among them, in 
Ch. I I, Ekac.lrir:ti is erroneously described as 'yellow' (ser-mo), Rudhiramadi 
as solely 'red' (dmar-mo), and Siddhikarl as solely 'green' (l;ang-klm). The 
Sanskrit identifications for Rudhiramadi, the consort of Mahabala (stabs­
chen), Siddhikari, the consort of Vasurak~ita (nor-srung), and the rak~asi 
Ekadrar:ti (srin-mo) are derived from Longchen Rabjampa, GGFTC, p. I 12.6. 
26. The six yogin! from the north who enact the rites of v.;rath (byang-nas drag-po 'i 
las-mdzad mal-'byor dbang-phyug drug) are sometimes depicted holding a 
crossed-vajra in addition to their individual hand-emblems, indicating that 
they belong to the retinue of Karma Heruka in the north. Among them, in 
Ch. 1 1, Agnayl and Cimury<;ii are described as solely 'red' (dmar-mo), Varahl 
as solely 'black' (nag-mo), and Varunaryl and Vayudevi as solely 'blue' (sngmz­
mo). Also, inCh. I 1 (Version B) Vayudcvi is depicted as 'snake-headed' instead 
of 'wolf-headed'. 
27. This verse concerns the four yogini who enact their emanational rites at"fhe 
outermost gates of the skull (sprul-pa'i las-mdzad dbang-phyug sgo-ma bzhi), 
and who complete the group of twenty-eight Isvari. Note that while in our 
text all four of these gatekeepers are generally referred to by the collecnve 
name VajrJ (rdo-r;e-ma), their distinctive names are found inCh. 14, pp. 3 70-
71, and in Longchcn Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 1127-2.8. !'IOTES 
2~!. These are the fifty-eight wrathful deities, w1th the addition of ,\t!ahortara 
Hcruka and Krodhisvari. 
29. The three smeared sacraments (byug-pa'i rd~as gsum) of the charnel ground, 
'ashes, blood and grease' (thai-chen rakta ~hag-gi zo-ris), indicate that they 
have subdued envy. The 'skim of moist hide and flayed tiger-skin' (ko-rlon 
gY.mg-g~hi st.zg-gz sh.mz-thabs) indicate that delusion, artachmenr and aver­
sion are respectively subdued by the ten powers (dasabai..I), dcsireless com­
passion and wrathful compassion. The snakes indicate their subjugation of the 
live social cLlsses. For a description of the symbolism of the wrathful deities 
in general, secT. !'\orbu, The Small Golden Key, pp. 78-84. In addition to the 
live herukas (khrag-'thung khro-bo'i tshogs), live krodhisvari (dbying-phyug 
khro-mo 'i tshogs), eight matara~, eight pis,\cT, twenty-eight Isvari (dbang­
phyuf.: mgo-brny..In tshogs), and four gatekeepers (sgo-ma bzhi) described 
in the previous verses, the wrathful mal)cJala also includes the eight great 
projcctresses (spor-byed chen-mo), who propel the consciousness of the 
deceased to higher rebirths, and who are enumerated individually in Ch. 6, 
pp. 108-9. 
30. Here 'fields' transbtes the Tibetan term khams ('sensory spectra') rather than 
skye-mched ('sensory activity fields'). 
3 1. This verse is derived from the Aspirational Prayer which Protects from Fear 
of the Intermediate States (Bar-do phrmzg-grol-gyi smon-lum), on which sec 
Ch. I2, pp. 314-I6. 
3 2. On the artainmcnt of buddha hood during the intermediate state of reality 
( chos-nyid b..Ir-do ), see below, Ch. II, pp. 2 26-3 2. 
33· Tib. Bur-do thos-grol. Sec below, Ch. I I, pp. 2I7-303. 
34· Tib. Zhi-khro ·, las-byang tshor-ba rang-grol. On this sadhana text, see Appen­
dix One, p. 382. 
3 5. Tib. gS.zng-dhung rig-pu rang-grol. This is one of the empowerment texts 
related to the cycle of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. Sec Appendix One. 
36. Tib. bsKong-bshags nyams-chags rang-grol. Sec below, Ch. 7, pp. I 13-50. 
6 Natural Liberation of Negativity and Obscuration 
I. Tib. Bar-do thos-~-:rol. 
2. Tib. brGya-phya~-: sd1g-sgnb rang-grol. 
3· Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa ra11g-gro/. 
4· A Sanskrit term, indicating obeisance or homage. 
5. The Delhi reprint of Bar-do thos-grol chen-mo includes an annotation to the 
effect that when generating the visuali!>ation of the ma•)9ala in front rather 
than prostrating to an already clearly visualised assembly, the words 'I bow 
down to such and such a buddha-body' (sku-/a phy,zg-'tshal-lo) should be 
replaced by the words 'such and such a buddha-body is primordially and 
radiantly present' (sku-ni ye-nas gsa/). 
6. Tib. chos-kyi khams. 
7. Tib. mtshun-'dzm. Here substannalism refers to the grasping at characteristics, 
having failed to understand that they lack inherent existence. 
8. DR here reads 'green-black' Uiang-nug), but see Ch. 5, p. 8 I, and Ch. I I, 
p. 264, where she is depicted as solely 'black'. 414 NOTES 
9· Note that Ulukamukhi is describt:d here as holding an iron hook (/cags-kyu), 
instead of a vajra, as inCh. 5, p. 8 3, and Ch. 11, p. 264. 
I o. According ro GG i-=TC, p. 113 5, Sphora may also have a bear-head (dom-mgo). 
11. According to GGi-=TC, p. II35, Ghar:t!<l may also have a wolf-head 
(spyang-mgo ). 
12. Tib. Zhags-'phen-mLl. 
13. Tib. mDung-tlmng 'phen-ma. 
14. Tib. sPor-byed dril-'khrol-ma. 
15. Tib. sl'ur-byed khyzmg-thugs-ma. 
16. Tib. sPor-byed skar-mda' 'phen-mu. 
17. This is a reference ro the great mythological battle (gYul-chen) betwt:en the 
gods and antigods, on which sec Anugods in gloss . .uy. 
18. Tib. sPor-hyed rdo-rJc glog-phreng 'dzin-mu. 
19. Tib. sPor-byeJ glags-slhz rdeb-ma. 
20. Tib. sPor-byed ral-gri 'dzin-mu. 
21. VajrJ is more commonly known as Pi11gala (dga'-ba). See Ch. 11, p. 265. 
22. Sec Ch. 5, p. 86. DR reads 'green'. 
23. The number 1 10 comprises the verses dedicated to the Hundred Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deitie'i, with the addition of two verses dedicated to Mahottara 
Heruka and Krodhcsvari, as well as eight verses dt:dicated to tht: Projectresses 
(SfJor-chen brg)'•ld). 
24. Tib. Na-r.1g bskang-hshags. A cclt:bratt:d treasure-doctrine (gter-chos) revealed 
during the thirteenth century by Guru Chowang, and included within his F.zght 
Tr,msnzitted Precepts: Cmzszmmz.:Jtwn of All Secrets (bKa '-brgyad gsang-bu 
yongs-rdzogsl. On this text, seeK. Dowman (trans.), 'Emptying the Depths of 
Hell', in Flight of the Garuda, pp. 53-61; also D. Christensen (trans.), Nu-r,zg 
bskmzg-bshugs. 
7 Natural Liberation through Acts of Confession 
1. Tib. Zhi-khro 'i klong-bshags briod-p.l rang-grol. 
2. Tib. Zab-chus zhi-khru dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
3. The offerings and dt:dications of great magnitude attributed to the bodhis,lttva 
Samantabhadra are recounted in the Av.Jtart~sakaszUra. See T. Cleary (trans.), 
The flower Omament Scripture, pp. I 1 3 5 ff.; and P. Williams, MahJyiinu 
Buddhism, pp. 125-7. 
4· Tib. gnyzs-med lryung-chub-sems. 
5. i.e. the monastic vows of the priitimok~a (so-sur thar-pa) discipline, on which 
sec glossary. 
6. DR, p. 409, I. 2, reads: srub-la 'phyar-bus ... Here we follow the Varanasi 
reprint: 'phyor-lt~ gYe11g-has. The Delhi reprint reads: srog-la 'tshal-bas. 
7· In the context of the mar:t~ala of wrathful deities, the Buddha-body of Realit.y 
is represented by Mahottara Heruka. 
!L In the context of the maJ)~ala of wrathful deities, the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource (sambhogakiiya) is represented by the Five Herukas and their 
LOn SOrtS. 
'J. The Four Pisaci situated 10 the cardmal directions of the wrathful assembly, 
n.uncly, Sif!lhamukhi, Vy<1ghrimukhi, S~galamukhi, and Svanamukhi, as their ~OTES 
names suggest, possess fangs, while those of the Intermediate directions: 
G~dhramukhi, Kankamukhi, Kakamukhi, and Ulukamukhi arc w1nged figures. 
10. Generally the Twenty-eight Isvarl are associated w1th the complete four rites 
or aspects of enllghtcned activity (las-bzhi) and not only abhiciira. 
1 1. DR, p. 4 1 2, I. 6, 'gugs-'ching-sdom-dgyes. Version A misreads 'gyeJ for 'gyes, 
while Version B misreads 'plrying for 'ching and dgyes for 'gyes. 
12. Tib. sh.J-khr,lg mchod-p.1. This refers to the offering of the five meats and five 
nectars, on which see G. Dorjc, 'The Nyingma Interpretation of Commitment 
and Vow', in The Buddh1st forum, Vol. 2, pp. 71-95. 
r 3· Tib. ma-bJun srmg-bzhi. On this group of eleven peripheral <)Jkinls, who arc 
classed as protectors in the retinue of Sridevi, see Jigrne Lingpa, dP1.1l-chen 
'Jus-pu. 
q. The wardens of the secret abodes (t1-ra gnus-nyu[/ g11as-nyul chc11-po) arc the 
protector deities associated wnh the sacred power-pLtces or pilgrim.1gc places 
of Tibet. 
1 5. Tib. rdo-rie rgy.;/-thahltlnb. 
r 6. Tib. hstan-pu 'i sgron-me is ht:rc U'>cd as an epithet of the assistant vajra-mastcr. 
NB DR, p. 416, reJds: ston-p.1'i sgrcm-ma. 
17. Tib. sgrol-ging hd,lg-pu is an epithet of Citipati, an awlytc of Yama, Lord of 
Death. 
IlL i.e. the four female gatekeepers of the \\·r.nhful assembly, Vajratejasl, Vajra­
moghJ, VajralokJ, and Vajravet.tlr, who 'summon and guide' ( 'gug-'Jren 
pho-ny.J). 
t 9· The rampant cgohood whicl1 can result from improper application of Buddhist 
practKes, particularly the tantras, is exemplified by the archetypal demonic 
furm Rudra, who is compassiOnately 'liberated' by the wrathful dc1ties. 
An:ounts concerning the past lives of Rudra are to he found in the mDo 
dgongs-pa 'dus-p1.1, Chs. 22-31, l47·5·Iff.; in Yeshe Tshogyal, The Life and 
L1beration of P.1dmasambhava, Pt. I, pp. 26-47, and Longchcn Rabjampa, 
GGFTC, pp. IOS0-95· 
20. Here we follow the Delhi reprint: hyings. DR, p. 418, reads gYeng. 
21. Tib. byams-mgon thugs-rie-cl.ln, i.e. Vajrasattva, to whom this enrrcaty is 
made. 
22. lit. albugo (ling-tog). 
2 3. Tib. kzm-nus dum-po 'i ting-le. 
24. T1b. DR, pp. 42_;-4, gzung-'Jzm gny1s-su 'J::m-pi.l nyo11-re-mongsl ng-p1.1 
ye-shes klrmg-Ju bshags-par hgyi. ;\;utc that Version A reads: yoJ-da11g med­
fJI.lr lta-hu nyon-re-mongsl rtug-ch,zd mcd-pu'i ye-sln:s klong-du bsh.Jgs. 
2 5. On the practices pertaining to th1s distinction, sec Longchen RabJampa, 
GGFTC, pp. <J00-'714. 
26. Tib. bh.Jg.J. 
27. Tih. )'i-dam {Jhy,zg-rgya. On the linking of the seals of the deities anJ the 
recitation of mantra, see glossary under Seals and Mantras. 
2S. i.e. the secret name (gsang-mtshan) conferred by a vajra-mastcr in the course 
of an empowerment ceremony. 
29. Tih. mngon-rtogs. 
30. The principal Nyingma text elucidating the integration of the vinaya, bodhis­
attva, and mantra vows expressed in this verse is ~gan Parychen 's Ascert.Jin­
ment of the Three Vows (sDom-gsum rnam-nges). 416 NOTES 
3 1. Tib. sKongs-bshags nyams-cl1<zgs rang-grul. This text, which is included within 
the wider cycle of The Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: Natural Lzbcration 
[through Recognition] of Enlightened Intention, comprises both empower­
mems and generation-stage practices. See Appendix One. 
32. According to the tradition of the treasure-doctrines (gter-chos), there arc four 
kinds of seal associated with the transmission of such teachings, namely: the 
seal of commitment (samayu-rg)'Ll), the seal of treasures (gter-rgya), the seal 
of conccalmem (sbas-rgya), and the seal of entrustment or succession (gtad­
rgya). See Dudjom Rinpoche, !'-iSTB, Vol. 2, p. 77· 
8 Natural Liberation through Recognition of the 
Visual Indications and Signs of Death 
I. Tib. 'Chi-ltas mtshan-ma rang-grol. The recognition of the signs and portents 
of impending death is also discussed in the context of Tibetan medicine. See 
Tibetan Medic..Jl Paintzngs, pp. 47-52, and pp. 203-8. 
2. Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
3· Tib. bar-do thos-pa rang-grol. See Ch. 11. 
4· for a discussion on the Buddhist phenomenological analysis of the aggregate 
of form (nipaskandha), which constitutes the human body, see 1.. Pruden 
(trans.}, Ahhidharmakusahha~y..z'?'· Ch. 1, The Dharus, pp. 6 3ff. 
5· Indications or symptoms of untimely death (dus-min 'chi-ha) may be treated 
by ritual purification, as recommended in this text, or by medical means, on 
which see Tibet..Jil Medical Paintings, p. 8 5. On the course of the lifespan 
principle within the body, see Tibetan Medical Paintilzgs, p. 39· 
6. The ritual deception of death ('chi bslu-ba) is the subject of Ch. 9· 
7· It should be stressed that the specificity of the external signs of impending 
death and the prognostications listed here are to be understood in the context 
of the spiritual practices outlined in other chapters of this cycle, since the 
examination cannot be undertaken in isolation from them. 
8. Tib. 'chi-bdag lag-tu song-ba. Lord of Death is an epithet of Yama. 
9· i.e. one calendar day or lunar day (tshes), comprising twenty-four hours. 
10. Viral breath is an aspect of vital energy (rlung; Skt. t''iyu), on which see glossary 
under Vital Energy. 
11. DR, Vol. 3, p. 181, I. 4, reads zhag 'ga' ('some days'}, but we have taken the 
present reading from the Delhi reprint. 
1 2.. Fur an account of the examination of dreams from the perspective of Tibetan 
medicine, see Tzbetan Medical Paintings, pp. 49-p, and 20 5-8. 
13. Tib. rgyal-pos srog-gcad. Here we follow the Delhi reprint (p. 438, I. 3). DR, 
p. 1 8 2, I. L, reads rgyal-po 'i srog-bc,1d. 
14· Tib. b)•ung-chub mchog-tu sems-bsk·yed. See Ch. 1, pp. 14-15. 
1 5· Tih. Jbang-gsum dam-tshig. See glossary under Four Empowerments acd 
Commitments. 
1 6. Sec also Tiheta11 Medical Pamtlngs, pp. 5 r -2.; and for remote indications ot 
death discernible to the phys~~.:ian approa~hing the residence of a patient, ibid., 
pp. 47-8. !\'ore that DR, p. 186, I. r, reads gzungs for gzugs. 
1 -;. i.e. rhe full-moon day of the lunar month. NOTES 
I 8. This mantra is that of the 'lord who subsumes the lifespan'. 
I 9· The other suitable hand-implements (phyag-mtshan) include the vajra and bell. 
2.0. The letter A is symbolic of emptiness (szlnyata). 
2. I. This cross-legged posture (rdo-rje skyil-krung) and folded hand-gesture of 
meditative cqu1poise (laK·P.J mn)·am-bzhag) arc both aspects of the seven-point 
posture of Vairocana (mam-snang chos-bdun), on which see glossary. 
2.2. Tib. hrtan-pa'i lha-dang bral-ba. 
2.3. Tib. spyi-gtsug bzlug-na. Our reading here follows the Delhi reprint (p. 450, 
I. 2.). DR, p. I 88, I. 6, has spyi-gtsug 'dug-na. 
2.4. Tib. gnas-lugs zah-mo 'z lta-ba. 
2 5. Tih. rlung-yum shor-ba. 
2.6. !\ore that OR (p. 191, I. 2.) and the Indian reprints all read 'six months' (zla-ba 
drug). 
2. 7. For a discussion on the elaborate procedures for urinalysis in general, sec 
Tibetun Medical Paintmgs, pp. 139-48, and 295-304. 
2.8. On th1s portent known as 'semng of the unchanging sun at the summit of 
!\fount Sumcru' (ri-r.Jb rtsc-I.J mi-'gyur nyi-m.J nub), the method of ritually 
averring death is unspecified in Ch. 9· !\ore that the Delhi reprint has an 
annotation adding that: 'if, instead, there arc small circles of light, this portends 
that the subJeCt will fall ill'. 
2.9. The Delhi reprint has an annotation adding that: 'if, instead, there is a slight 
humming sound, this portends that the subject will fall ill'. 
30. On this portent known as 'rupturing of the Wish-granting Tree from the 
Summit of Mounr Sumeru' (ri-rab rtse-nas dpag-bsam IJon-shzng chag), the 
method of ritually averring death is unspecified inCh. 9· !\ore that the Delhi 
version has an annotation adding that: 'if, instead, there is a slight trace of 
evaporation, this portends that the subject will fall ill'. 
-~I. Yavati is more specifically identified as an acolyte of Mah<lk<lla, or as an aspect 
of Pehar. The Delhi version has an annotation adding that: 'if, instead, the tuft 
of hair stands up alone for a short time, this portends that one will fall ill'. 
On the posterior and pterion fontanelles subsumed in the phrase ltag-p.1'i 
hdud-sgo-dag, see Tibetan Medical Paintings, pp. 2.49-50. 
3 2.. Tih. 'chi-ltas thor-bu. On this category of signs, which are also classified as 
'sudden changes relating to death' (glo-bur rnam-gyur-gyi 'chi-ltas) within the 
T1betan medical tradnion, sec Tibet.Jn Medical Paintings, pp. 2.07-8. 
-~ 3. Sec Chapter 1 o for these practices. 
34· As stared in Tselc 1\:atsok Rangdrol, The Mirror of Mzndfulness, p. 56, the 
sequence may alter as far as the dissolution of the outer elements is concerned. 
3 5· At this juncture the secret sign of the impending luminosity appears like a 
mirage, and the subject's vision will hecomc unclear. On this dissolution 
of the earth clement into the water element, and its coincidence with the 
disintegration of the navel energy-centre of the body, sec Tsclc 1\:atsok Rang­
drol, The Mrrror of Mmdfitlness, pp. 54-5. 
3 6. At this juncture the secret sign of rhc impending luminosity appears like a 
misry smoke; <1nd the subject's hearing will become unclear. On this dissolution 
of rhc water clement into the tire element, and irs coincidence with the disinte­
gration of the heart energy-centre of the body, sec Tselc Narsok Rangdrol, 
The .\tzrrur of ,\fznd(umess, p. 55· 418 NOTES 
37· At th1s Juncture the secret sign of the impending luminosity appears like 
red firetl1es, and the subject's ability to smell will cease. The location of the 
body from which the warmth recedes indicates the place of subsequent 
rebirth, as indicated on pp. 177-9. On this dissolution of the fire element into 
the air element, and its coincidence with the disintegration of the throat 
energy-centre of the body, see Tsele )'.;atsok Rangdrol, The Mzrror of lvlind­
fulness, p. 55. 
38. At this juncture the secret sign of the impending luminosity appears like a 
flaming torch, and the subject's ability to taste will cease. On this dissolution 
of the wind clement into the space element or consCiousness, and its coinci­
dence with the dismtegration of the sexual energy-centre of the body, see Tscle 
Natsok Rangdrol, The Mirror of Mmd/itlness, pp. 55-6. The five sense­
faculties and the sensory spectra are also dissolved at this juncture. from this 
point onwards, death cannot be reversed. 
39· Note that in other texts of this genre, the descent of whiteness precedes 
the ascent of redness. However, Jigme Lingpa in his sKu-gsum zhmg-kh.mzs 
sbyong-smon follows the sequence outlined here, and according to Tsclc Na­
tsok Rangdrol, op. cit., p. 57, it is uncertain whether the whiteness or redness 
will mamfest first. 
40. Tib. srog-rtsa. The so-called 'black life channel' (srog-rtsa nag-po) is identified 
with the aorta, in Tibetan medicine, while the 'white life-channel' (srog-rtsa 
dkar-po) is identified with the spinal cord. See Tibetan Medzcul P.1intmgs, 
pp. 191-2, and 197-8. 
41. On the signitic.mce of the syllables HI KA in the transference of comuousness 
( 'pho-ba), see Ch. 10, pp. 203-4. 
42. On the dissolution of consciousness into inner radiance ( 'od-gsal; Skt. prabhJ­
svara) during the intermediate state of the moment of death ( 'chi-kha 'i bar-do), 
sec Ch. 1 1, pp. 22 7-34· 
43· On the mother and child aspects of reality, otherwise known as the naturally 
occurring inner radiance of the ground and the cultivated inner radiance of 
the path, see Ch. 1 1, pp. 22 7-34· The latter is the intrinsic awareness cultivated 
by meditators dunng their lifetime. 
44· The period following the cessation of the coarse outer breath (phyi-dbugs) and 
before the cessation of the subtle inner breath (11ang-dbugs), also known as 
the life-sustaining wind (srog-'dzin-gyi rlung; Skt. prJ'!a), is that durmg wh1ch 
the vital energy and mind are drawn together into the central channel, causing 
ordinary beings to lapse into unconsciousness. On this distinction betwc:en 
inner breath and outer breath, see also Ch. 1 1, p. 228. 
45· The inner radiance of the path (/am-gyi 'od-gsal) is that experienced by prac­
titioners and yogins through their spiritual practices prior to death. See glossary 
under Inner Radiance. 
46. T1b. g11od-sbym. Other texts suggest that this mode of rcbmh is indicated 
by the emission of consciousness from the nose. See Lati Rinpoche and J. 
Hopkins, Death, /ntermedzate State and Rebirth in Tzbetan Buddhism, p,'5 3; 
also A. Wayman, The Buddhzst Tantras, p. 141. On the term yak~a, see 
glossary. 
4 7. On the transference of consciousness ( 'pho-ba) through the crown fontanelle, 
anJ the .1ppear.1nce of serum at the crown of the head as an inJ1cation of 
success 111 this practice, see below, Ch. 10, pp. 203-4. !'lOTES 
48. Tib. sKu-gdung 'bur-ba'i rgyud. This text is one of the Seventeen Tantras of 
the Esoteric Instructional Class of the Grear Perfection (rdzogs-chen nzan-ngag 
sde'i rgyud bcu-bdun), and is contained in NGB, Vol. 3· 
49· Tih. bTags-grol. This text forms rhe subject matter of Ch. q, pp. 347-79. 
50. As explained in Ch. ro. 
51. Tib. Bar-do thos-grol. This text is the subject matter of Ch. II, pp. 225-303. 
52· Tib. 'Chi-ba bslu-ha. This text is the subject matter of Ch. 9, pp. r 84-9 5. 
53· The presence of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities within the heart and the 
brain has already been explained in detail. See Ch. 5, pp. 67-88. 
9 Natural Liberation of Fear 
r. Tib. 'Chi-bslu 'jigs-pa rang-grol. The.! Tengyur contains a number of ritual 
texts, similar to the present chapter, concerning the deception of death ( 'chi-ba 
bslu-ha; Skt. m~tyu~(hilpaka), including those by Tath.igatarak~ita (T 1702), 
Vaglsvarakirtl (T I748), and Ajiramitragupra (T 2839). A hybrid Sanskrit title 
Krodha amukho.1 bhela is also attributed to the present text. 
2.. Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
3· The Varanasi reprint, p. 213, reads Vajrakum<lra (rdo-rje gzhon-nu). DR, 
p. 2.06, I. I, reads only gzhon-mt. Vajrakumara is the subject of this invocation, 
being rhe emhodiment of buddha-activity. 
4· The earliest extant literature on guidance through the intermediate states 
appears to have a strong association with this particular bodhisattva. Sec e.g. 
KJrJ~ujauyuhas!ltra, and M. Lalou, 'Chemins du mort dans lcs croyanccs de 
haute-asie', which mcludes a translation of an ancient Dunhuang manuscript 
entitled Expose du chemin du mort (gshi11-lam bslan-ba), where Avalokir­
esvara is referred to particularly as a deity who guides and rescues those 
propc:llcd towards hellish rehirths. 
5· On the course of the lifespan principle (tshe'i rtsa), subsuming the five elements, 
over a monthly cycle, and the location of the vulnerable points of the body in 
relation to it, sec Tibetan Medical Paintings, pp. 39-40. 
6. Tih. rlung-gi 'khor-lo. On the meditative stabilities related to the live clements, 
and the relationship between the live colours, the five clements, and the five 
seed-syllables, see Longchcn Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 619-20. 
7. These are the vowels (a-li) and consonants (ka-li) of the Sanskrit alphabet, for 
the symbolism of which see Longchen Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 5 54-99. 
8. The deities embodying the elements correspond to those of the Hindu pan­
theon, e.g. Pavana, who embodies the wind element, Agni who embodies the 
lire clement, V aruna who embodies the water element, and Visnu who 
embodies the earth ~lcmcnt. For the Buddhist perspective, sec Longch~n Rab­
jampa, GGfTC, pp. I I 24-8. 
9· YA~t is absorbed into Pavana, RA~ into Agni, LA~t into Vi~~u, and KHA~t 
into Varu~a. 
IO. DR, p. 209, I. 3, adds an annotation, suggesting that these should include the 
hrcath of horses, elephants and buffaloes. 
I 1. DR, p. 209, I. 4, adds an annotation to the effect that the syllable RA~1 is 
inserted into the effigy's eyes, the syllable KIIA~t into its cars, the syllable LA~ 
into its tongue, the syllable Y A.~t into Hs nose, and the syllable E into its neck. 42.0 NOTES 
11.. OR, p. 1.09, I. 6, adds that the effigy should be black when offered to male 
malevolent forces (bdud), red when oifered to martial haunting spirits (btsan) 
and hybrid serpentine haunting spirits (klu-btsun), yellow when offered to 
hybrid serpentine and plague-cau'iing spirits (k/u-gny.m) and malign goblins 
(the"u-rang), white when offered to the king spirits (rgyu/-po), and green when 
offered to the female malevolent forces (bdud-mo), rural divinities (yul-lhu), 
.md multicoloured when offered to earth-ogres (sa-srm). 
13. Tih. ltas-ngan-t,')'i hya-sgrog. Feathers of the owl in partiwlar are deemed to 
he harbingers of 1ll-omens. 
14. The sense organs are here consecrated with seed-syllables indicative of each of 
the five elemenrs in turn, heginnmg with LA~t, the seed-syllable of the earth 
elemenr. 
15. The Heart-mantra of Dependent Origination (rten-'brel snyrng-po), which 
llberates the enduring continuum of phenomena and induces the appearance 
of multiplying relics ( 'phcl-gdwzg) and rainbow lights, is: YE DHAR~tA H ETU­
PRARIIAVA IIETUN TE~A~t TATHAGATO HY AVADAT T£?A~I CA YO NIRODHO 
EVAM vAol MAIIA~RA:>.tANAII ('Whatever events arise from a cause, the 
TathJgata has t<Jld the caus~ th.ereof, and the great virruous ascetic has taught 
their ~..:essation as well'). See also Ch. I 4, p. 376; and S. Beyer, The Cult of 
TJrJ, p. 146. 
16. On the symbolism of the Sanskrit syllable A, indicative of emptiness, see 
GGrTC, pp. 5 59-63. This syllable is frequently utilised as a focal point for 
the meditations of calm abiding (s,mzutha), in which case It is visualised at the 
tip of the nose. There are recorded inst.HKes of the syllable adually mamfest1ng 
on the up of the nose of certain great meditation masters of the past. See e.g. 
the life of KumJrjdza in NSTB, pp. 56H-71.. 
17. On the seed-syllable BHRO~t. the first of the mantras through which the 
mai)~ala of the peaceful de1ties is genera ted, specifically rcfernng to the ~..:reative 
visualisation of the celestial p.1laces of the deities, see Longchen Rahjampa, 
GGrTC, pp. 6H9-90. 
1!L On the seed-syllable K~A, which is the final seed-syllable of the ma~9ala of the 
peaceful deities, specifically referring to Buddha Samamabhadra, see Longchen 
R.1bpmpa, GGFTC, p. 591. 
19. The short syllable 110 ,~ has a contracted anusvara, in which the crescent and 
n.ida are subsumed in the bindu . 
.2.0. The syllable MA~ is that of the fen1.1le buddha M.imaki. See Longchen R.lb­
jampa, GGFTC, pp. 691-1. . 
.2.1. The syllable M 0 .~1 is that the female buddha Dhatvi5vari. See Longchen Rab­
jampa, GGFTC, p. 69r. 
21.. T1b. rtsa gnyzd-lug. See Ch. I I, p. 228 . 
.2.3. On the d1verse divisiom of the Buddhist scriptures (gswzg-rub) from the 
!'\yingma pomt of VIeW, see Dudjom Rmpoche, NSTB, pp. n-87. 
24. The rituals referred to here are somewhat unclear, but for the treatment of 
d1~eases pertaining to the five solid viscera and the six hollow viscera, ~e 
TdJct,m Medicull'amtmgs, pp. 101-2., and pp. 257-S. 
2.5. The following series of signs of near death are observed in the urine specimen. 
Note that whereas here it is the urine scum (spris-m..I) that appears blue or red, 
inCh. 8, p. 170, these colours are attributed to the urine vapour (r/angs-pa). See NOTI:S 421 
also the elaborate explanattons of urinalysis given in Tibetan Medical l'aint­
mgs, pp. 139-48, and pp. 295-304. 
26. The combination of the five clements (khams-lnga) with the twelve animal 
year-signs is an important feature of elemental divination ( 'byung-rtsis), on 
which see G. Dorje, Tibetan Elemental Divinatzon Paintings, pp. 66-86. 
27. The Delhi reprint adds an annotation to the effect that this is also applicable 
if the humming sound disappears intermittently. 
28. At this point, the various versions of our text include the following paragraph: 
'In cases when [one's shadow] is missing from the neck upwards, one should 
visu.1lise the syllable Y A~1 in the subject's heart, and gaze upwards as high as 
one can. [Death] will then be averted if one performs ablutions from the 
crown downwards with water [empowered by] mantras of retentton.' This 
observation appears to be misplaced, referring as it does to the analysis of the 
optically proJected shadow rather than the humming of the ears. 
ro Natural Liberation through Recollection 
I. Tib. 'I'hu-ba dran-pa rang-gro/. 
2. Tib. rDzogs-rim bar-do drug-gi khrid-yig. This cycle has been translated into 
English by Alan Wallace. See Natural Liberation. 
-~· Tib. Zab-clws zhi-khro dgongs-pa r.mg-grol. 
4· The six topics of the perfection stage (s,mzpannakrama) respcdivdy relate to 
the stx intermediate states summ<trised in Ch. 3· Among them, the yoga of 
consciousness transference relates ro the intermediate state of the ttme of dc.1th 
('chz-kha'i b.u-do), on which see also Ch. II, pp. 225-34. At this point an 
annotation in the text refers to the importance of this chapter as 'an oral 
tnstruction which is like the giving of a royal injunction' (rgyal-pu bka'-thcm 
bskur-ba Ita-Im). 
5. Tib. 'Chi-ltas mtshan-la rang-grol. See Ch. 8, pp. I 53-8 I. 
6. On the ritual deception of death ( 'chi-bslu), see above, Ch. 9, pp. 184-9 5. 
7· Tih. 'Chi-bslu '1igs-p.1 rang-gro/. This is the subject matter of Ch. 9 above. 
8. Consciousness transference may be taught in the context of general guidance 
(khrid-kyi dus), as in the case of the preliminary practices (sngon-'gro). Sec 
Paltrul Rinpoche, The Words of My Perfect Teacher, pp. 3 5 I -6 5; and Sonam 
T. Kazi (trans.), Kzm-::.ang La-may Zhal-lung, Pt. 3, pp. 49 3-5 I 6 . .:V1anuals 
of particular guidance on consciousness transference ( 'fJho-ba'i sgos-khrid) 
include the present chapter from Karma Lingpa 's Zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang­
grol and Tsele 1\:atsok Rangdrol's The ;'vtirror of Mindfulness, pp. 65-73. 
9. Tib. khrid kyz sngon 'gro. See above, Ch. 1. 
I o. Tib. sa-gnon-pa 'i phyag-rgya (Skt. bhztmyakrama~w), here identified with the 
bhtlsparsamudra. 
1 1. On the association of these other orifices with specific modes of rehirrh, sec 
p. 214. 
12. On the crown or anterior fontanelle (tshangs-pa'i bu-ga), and its relationship 
to the central energy channel of the subtle body (avadhuti), sec Tibetan Medical 
Paintmgs, pp. 3 3-40 and pp. I 89-96. 
1 3. On the relation between the central channel and those of the Rasanj to its right 422 NOTES 
and the Lalana to its left, see also Longchen Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. roo6 ff., 
and Tibetan Medical Paintings, pp. 3 3-4. 
14. Tib. khu-tshur. 
15. See Ch. 3, p. 33· 
16. This refers to the recitation of Ch. 11 of the present work. 
17. On these transformations, see Ch. 8, pp. 156-9 and 171-3. 
I 8. This reference is unidentified. 
19. Tib. Nyi-zla kha-sbyor. This text is contained in Vol. 4 of the Collected Tantras 
of the Nyingmapa (rNying-ma'i rgyud-'bum). 
20. The 'field of accumulated merits' (tshogs-bsags zhing), to whom offerings 
are made, comprises one's parents, invalids or other disadvantaged persons, 
spiritual teachers, monks, and bodhisattvas. 
21. Skt. sarm.zagamana. On the taking of refuge, see above, Ch. 1, pp. I 1-I 3; and 
also glossary. 
22. There are many diverse techniques of consc.iousness-transference within the 
Tibetan tradition, including those derived from The Six Doctrines of Naropa 
(Naro chos-drug), the Innermost Spirituality of Longchenpa (Kiong-chen 
snying-thig), and the present cycle. 
2 3. Tib. thos-grol. The words to be communicated in this context are contained 
below, Ch. 11, which includes descriptions of the three intermediate states of 
the time of death, reality, and rebirth. The intermediate state of reality (chos­
nyid bar-do) is also known as the intermediate state of inner radiance ('ad­
gsa/), on which see Ch. I I, p. 227ff. 
24. just as there are outer, inner, and secret signs of impending death (see Ch. 8, 
pp. 15 5-71) and outer and inner signs of the efficacy of the mantras utilised 
in 'liberation by wearing' (see Ch. 14, passim), so here, in the context of the 
various types of consciousness-transference, there are 'outer' signs observable 
in the atmosphere, 'inner' signs observable on the body of the deceased, and 
'secret' signs observable in the relics that emerge after death. On the appearance 
of seed-syllables among the cremated relics of great spiritual teachers, see e.g. 
Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, p. 564. 
25. The white syllable .A~r is the seed-syllable of Vajradhara, the azure syllable 
HO 1\:1 is that of Vajrasattva, and the red syllable HRII) is that of Avalokitesvara. 
See Longchen Rabjampa, GGFTC, Ch. 7, pp. 682-93. 
26. The five types of bone-relic (Tib. dung-rigs mam-pa-lnga), which appear fol­
lowing the cremation, are associated with the five seed-syllables of the five 
male budd has, and with five bodily constituents. See Ch. 14· On the appearance 
of cremation relics in the form of a deity's hand-implement (phyag-mtshan) or 
image (sku-'dra), see e.g. Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 572. 
27. Here the emergence of tluids from the left nostril rather than the crown 
fontanelle is an indication that the consciousness-transference has taken effect 
into the Buddha-body of Emanation rather than into the Buddha-bodies of 
Reality or Perfect Resource. On the appearance of such signs, see Ch. I4, 
passim; and for a recorded instance of the whole skull being left as a crematipn 
relic, sec Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, p. 572. 
28. Orgyan, i.e. an epithet of Padmasambhava. 
29. Tib. snd pa'i sgo zhes bya ba khams dang thig Ia dkar dmar 'gyu-ba'i lam. 
30. Tib. de-kho-na-nyid-kyi dam-tshig-dang sdom-pa. In general, all the commit­
ments of the Vehicle of Indestructible Reality and all vows associated with NOTES 
pious attendants and bodhisattvas may be termed commitments and vows 
taken with respect to the nature of reality. More specifically, however, this 
refers to the four commitments taken by practitioners of the Great Perfection: 
nothingness, evenness, uniqueness, and spontaneity, on which see R. Barron 
(trans.), The Precious Treasury of the Way of Abiding. 
31. Tib. btags-grol. See Ch. 14· 
3 2. Tib. thos-grol. See Ch. I I. 
I I The Great Liberation by Hearing 
Part One 
I. Tib. Thos-grol chen-mo. 
2. Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
3. Tib. khrid-kyi rim-pa. This refers to all the levels of instruction received during 
the course of a person's lifetime, including those based on the sutras and the 
tantras. The experiential cultivation of the 'great emptiness' (stong-pa chen-po) 
which the practitioner of Mahayoga enters into in the course of daily practice 
brings about a dissolution of normal conceptual consciousness into a non-dual, 
non-conceptual awareness. The signs which accompany the successful actualis­
ation of this meditative process are identical to those which occur at the 
time of death. The resulting familiarity with the process of the dissolution of 
consciousness allows the practitioner, at the time of death, to pass through an 
accustomed process and thereby to enter the non-conceptual inner radiance 
without confusion and to rest in its nature, with stability. 
4· See above, Ch. Io. 
5. See above, Ch. 8. 
6. Tib. bden-pa'i stabs. This refers to an invocation prayer evoking the power of 
the truth of the ultimate nature of mind and phenomena embodied in the 
meditational deities, the sacred writings, and the community of sincere prac­
titioners. 
7· This esoteric meditative process, which is divulged only to fully qualified 
practitioners, is described in supplementary texts relating to the present cycle, 
such as Guiding the Deceased to Higher Rebirths: The Natural Liberation 
of the Six Realms of Beings (Tshe-'das gnas-'dren 'gro-drug rang-grol). See 
Appendix One. 
8. The belief in the notion of the continuity of consciousness creates a very 
different perspective among the bereaved within Buddhist communities. 
Although grief is not repressed, the family members and friends arc encouraged 
to support the consciousness of the deceased by being themselves strong in 
their spiritual practice and dedicating this effort to the deceased. Sympathy for 
the spiritual opportunities being presented to the deceased during and after 
the death process is strongly stressed. Clinging, attachment and extreme sor­
row are discouraged, whilst creating an atmosphere of openness, compassion 
and acceptance of change is emphasised and highly valued. 
9· On this interval following the cessation of outer respiration (phyi-dbugs) and 
preceding the cessation of inner respiration (nang-dbugs), see p. 228. 
ro. The injunction not to touch the body of the deceased extends from the moment 424 NOTES 
when the cons~.:iousness enters the central channel until the vital energy leaves 
the body; a period of time which can be just a few moments or up to three 
days. This injunction is often repeated in the present text and stressed by 
Tibetan lamas who explain that touching the body draws the mindfulness of 
the individual to the place being touched. Since the point on the body from 
which the wnsciousness exits is related to the quality of the mental realm into 
whi~.:h it may enter, drawing the mindfulness by touching can be helpful or 
harmful. See above, Ch. 10, p. 214. 
11. Traditionally, every Tibetan household has a shrine which is the focus of the 
household's daily ritual and devotional activity. At the time of a bereavement 
various ancillary rituals are also performed together with the reading of this 
Gre.zt Liberatwn by Hearing. Often a tent is erected in the garden and a large 
altar laid out. There is much activity, involving both the family and the 
attending monks, in making the preparations for the rituals. The sense of 
bewilderment at the death of a loved one is Strongly tempered by the purpose­
fulness in the activity directed at supporting and inspiring the consciousness 
of the deceased. 
12. These prayers are read to the dying person in order to inspire a calm and 
dignified approach to death. For the full text of the Aspirational Prayer Calling 
to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas (or Assistance (Sangs-rgy,zs-dang byang-chub 
sems-dpa 'i-mams-/a ra-md,z' sbran-pa 'i smon-lam ); the Aspirational Prayer 
which Protects from fear of the Intermediate States (B..zr-do 'iigs-skyob-m,z'i 
smun-lam), and the Aspirational Prayer U'hich Rescues (rom the D..zngerous 
Pathw,zys of the Intermediate St,ztes (Bar-do 'phrang-sgrol-gyi smon-lam), see 
Ch. 12; and for the Root Verses of the Szx Intermediate States (Bar-Jo 'i 
rtsa-tshig), see above, Ch. 3· The attitude in which the dying person approaches 
death is regarded <15 the must essential fa~.:tor in ensuring the continued well­
bemg of the individual. For the dying individual to cultivate an attitude of 
compassion towards others during the process of death is regarded as primary. 
Remaining fearless and fully aware of the processes of dying, whilst also being 
prepared to recognise the qualities of awareness which naturally arise during 
and after the moment of death, is strongly enwuraged. 
I 3· Tib. 'chi-kha'i bur-do-la 'od-gsul ngo-sprod-pa. This is the introduction to the 
radiance which arises immediately after the ceasing of respiration at the 
moment when the vital energies collect at the mid-pomt of the ~o:entral channel, 
close to the heart. See also above, Ch. 8, pp. I 73-7, and Ch. 10, pp. 205-9, 
where reference is also made to this intermediate state. 
I4. Tib. chos-nyid bt~r-do-la 'od-gsa/11go-sproJ-pa. This is the introduction to the 
radiance experienced by the mental body of the deceased in the form of the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. See pp. 234-72; also Tsele :--.:atsok Rangdrol, 
The Mzrror of Mmd(ulness, pp. 77-102. 
I 5· Tib. srid·{Ja bar-do-la nmgal-sgo dgag-thubs bstan-pa. The final section of this 
chapter describes five profound methods for avoiding unwntrolled rebirth in 
an unfavourable realm. See pp. 28 5-300; also Tsele Natsok Rangdrol The 
Mirror of Mindfulness, pp. 105-28. 
I 6. In this context, the advice is to invite to the bedside an individual who has 
followed the same meditational practices as the dying person. 
1 7· In this wnrext, the advice is to invite to the bedside an individual who has 
studied .md pradised within the same commentarial tradition. NOTES 
r8. i.e. the central energy channel of the body. 
19. This period during which vital energy and consciousness arc united in the 
central channel is also described as that in which the 'inner breath' (nang­
dbugs) remains within the body. It is said to last approximately twenty 
minutes. 
20. Tib. bar-do dang-po 'i 'od-gsal, i.e. the inner radiance which arises at the 
culmination of the intermediate state of the time of death is the first of three 
successive 'intermediate states' that occur after death and prior ro the rebirth 
process. They comprise the inner radiance of the ground, the inner radiance 
of the path, and the inner radiance of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities in the 
intermediate state of reality. These three phases arc not to be confused with 
the classical enumeration of the six intermediate states as described in Ch. 3 
and in the glossary. 
2 I. Throughout the death process and at each step in the reading of the Great 
Liberution by Hearing, the presiding lama should enter into those meditative 
states of awareness which the text describes and which the dying person is 
encouraged to cultivate. In this way, he serves as a support and anchor for the 
concentration of the dying and the deceased. 
22. Tib. rtsa rba-rlahs rtsis-ha. Tibetan medicine describes diverse types of pulse 
which indicate impending death due to humoral imbalance, visceral failure and 
so forth. See Tibetan Medical Paintings, p. 137. On the procedures followed in 
pulse palpation, sec ibid., p. I 2 3. 
2 3. Tib. gnyid-log rtsa-gnyis. The two carotid arteries 'which induce unconscious­
ness when pressed', are included among the body's most vulnerable points. 
See Tibetan Med1cal Pai11tings, pp. 33, 43· Pressure applied at the right moment 
is said to trap the vital energy and mind rogcther in the central channel, with 
no possibility of regression or reversal. Correct training in this procedure is of 
crucial importance, and it is obviously essential that the carotids arc not 
pressed until after the pulse has ceased. 
24. On the crown or anterior fontanelle (Tib. tshangs-lmg; Skt. bruhmarandhra), 
which is the optimum point of exit for the consciousness of the dying indi­
vidual, see Ch. 10, p. 214. 
2 5. The period following the cessation of the coarse outer breath (phyi-dbugs) and 
before the cessation of the subtle inner breath (nang-dbugs), also known as 
the life-sustaining vital energy (Tib. srog-'dzin-gyi rlung; Skt. prdl.l.J), is that 
during whi~:h the vital energy and mind arc drawn together into the central 
channel, causing ordinary beings to lapse into unconsciousness (shes-pa 
brgyul). This moment is also desGibcd in terms of the bla~:kncss induced by 
the merging of the white male and red female generative essences at the 
heart-centre of the central channel. See Ch. 8, p. 17 5. 
26. The Tibetan biographical tradition cites many instances of great spiritual 
teachers who at the time of their demise enter into the prolonged experience 
of this intermediate state. 
27. See Ch. ro, p. 203. 
28. See Ch. 8, p. 17 3ff. An alternative description of this process is also given in 
medical texts. Sec Tibetan Medical Paintings, pp. 5 r-2: 'Upon the sinking of 
the earth element into the water clement, the patient ceases to grasp the solidity 
of obJects. Upon the sinking of the water element into the fire clement, the 
sensory orifices dry up. Upon the sinking of the fire element into the wind 426 ~OTES 
clement, bodily heat disappears. Upon the sinking of the wind element into 
the space element, breathing stops. As far as the five sensory organs, born out 
of the five primordial elements, are concerned, the first to cease functioning is 
sight, then comes the ability to hear, followed by the senses of smell, taste and 
finally touch. Consequent on this tactile loss, life itself wanes; and all sensory 
functions &~.solve into the life-sustaining breath, which itself vanishes into 
consciousness, destined for future rebirth.' 
29. On the relationship between the various orifices from which serum is exuded 
and the realms inhabited by sentient beings, sec Ch. 10, p. 214; also A. 
Waym.1n, The Buddhist Tantras, Ch. 12, pp. I 39-;o, whose account is based 
on the commentarialliterature of the Guhyasama;a Tantra. 
30. The harsh and bewildering experiences related to past actions (las-kyi 'khrul­
snanJd are those manifestations of sound, lights and rays of light \vhich 
appear during the intermediate state of reality (chos-nyid bar-do), in con­
trast to the terrifying experiences related to Yama (gslmz-riel which occur 
Juring the intermediate state of rebirth (srid-pa'i bar-do). See p. 234ff and 
pp. 268-9. 
3 I. Smce the meditational deities are pure appearances inseparable from empti­
ness, they are said to 'appear and yet lack inherent existence' (snang-la 
rang-bzhin med-pa) and to be 'devoid of solid or corporeal forms' (gdos-bcas 
med-pa). See also Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. I 23-7, 2.79-80; Longchen 
Rahjampo1, GG FTC, pp. 62.6-8 r. 
32.. i.e. Avalokite5vara. 
33· On the risk of inferior rebirth (ngan-song) which confronts those who have 
broken their vows (sdom-pa shor-ba) and failed to mainto1in their basic com­
mitments (rtsa-ha'i dam-tshig nyams), see Ch. 7; also Longchen Rabjampo1, 
GGFTC, pp. 1184-229. 
34· On this convergence of the mother and child aspects of reality (chos-nyid­
ma-lm), which Jrc identified respectively with the inner radiance of the ground 
and the inner radiance of the path, the latter cultivated by the meditator during 
his or her lifetime, see also Ch. 8, pp. 176-7. 
3 5. The experiences of the 'mental body' (yzd-kyi Ius) during the intermediate 
stJtes of reality o1nd rebirth are described below in detail. See pp. 2.73-8;. 
3 6. The intermediate state of reality is here referred to as the 'third intermediate 
state' (bar-do gsum-pa) when it is enumerated following the two phases of 
inner radiance of the ground and path that arise during the intermediate state 
of the time of death ('chi-kha'i bar-do). 
37· Tib. Chos-nyid bar-do'i ngo-sprod chen-mo. 
3 8. For a synopsis of the classical enumerauon of the six categories of intermediate 
state: namely the intermediate state of the living or natural existence (rang­
b;::lmz skye-gnas-kyi lhzr-du); the intermediate state of dreams (rmi-lam b,zr-do); 
the intermedi3te state of meditative stability (ting-nge- 'dzin bsam-gtan-gyi 
lhzr-do ); the intermediate state of the time of death ( 'chi-kha 'i bar-do ); the 
intermediate Stolte of reality (chos-nyid bar-do); and the intermedio1te St3~ of 
consequent rebirth (lugs-'hyung srid-pa'i bar-do), see glossary. Tsele Natsok 
Rangdrol, The Mirror of Mindfulness, pp. 75-102, also discusses the diverse 
interpretations of the intermediate state of reality presented by the different 
~~hools of Tibetan Buddhism. 
'9· A~ stJtcJ above, p. 229, the intermediate state of the time of death is said to l'OTE~ 
last up to three and a half days, so that those who have failed to recognise the 
inner radiances of the ground and path remain unconscious for the same 
period of time. It is on being aroused from that unconscious state that the 
visions of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities of the intermediate state of reality 
then arise. It is important to bear in mind that the use of the word 'day' in this 
context and those which follow is from the standpoint of the bereaved. From 
the perspective of the deceased, as Tsele Natsok Rangdol states, 'Few people, 
however, consider these to be actual solar days. Since they are ... only medi­
tation Jays, understand that for ordinary people they do not appear for more 
than a short moment' (Mtrror of Mindfulness, p. I I 3 ). 
40. On the reversal of cyclic existence and of all its aspe~:ts of mundane conscious­
ness and sense-perception through the practices of the Great Perfection, see 
NSTB, p. 340, and GGFTC, pp. 395-97, Iooi-5. 
4 I. The events which unfold in the course of the intermediate states of reality and 
rebirth are held, in the view of the presenr text, to endure approximately for 
forty-nine days. Note however that this period of forty-nine Jays is not said 
to be fixed. See Tsele Natsok Rangdrol, The Mirror of Mindfulness, p. 22. It 
is recognised that the nature of the appearances in the intermediate state of 
reality will vary according to the meditative tradition followed. Tsele Natsok 
Rangdrol (ibid., pp. 98-1 oo) does emphasise, on the other hand, that the pure 
psycho-physical aggregates, elements, sense-organs, and so forth, will manifest 
as sounds, lights and rays. 
42. Tib. dlms-su thig-le brdal-ha'i zhing-khams. An epithet of the Akani~~ha­
Ghanavyiiha realm of Yairocana Buddha, on which sec glossary. 
43· Tib. Je-hzhin gshegs-pa'i 'od-zer chos-dbyings-kyi ye-shes zhes-bya-ba. This 
luminosity is called the 'light ray of the Tathagata' because Yairocana Buddha 
is said to preside over the Tathagata or Buddha family. On the compassionate 
unfolding of the great light rays of the tathagatas, see also Dudjom Rinpo~:he, 
NSTB, pp. 912-I3. 
44· Note that the text associates both the dull white light of the god-realms and 
the dull green light of the animal realms (seep. 25 3) with the propensities for 
delusi(m (gtz-mug) . .\lore generally, delusion is recognised as the primary 
dissonant mental state g1ving rise to birth among the animals, and pride as the 
primary dissonant mental state giving rise to birth among the gods. 
4 5. Note that pride is more generally asso~:iated with birth in the god realms, while 
it is attachment ( 'doJ-chags) or a combination of all five dissonant mental 
states that is said to generate birth as a human being. See above, Ch. 5. 
46. On the significaiKe in Atiyoga of the 'state of non-activity' (byar-med-kyi 
ngang), see above Ch. 4; also NSTB, pp. 33 5-7, 896-9 xo. 
47· Tib. ye-shes bzhi-sbyor-gyi snang-ba. 
>lB. This passage associates the white luminosity with the pristine cognition of 
reality's expanse and Yairo~:ana, and the blue light with the mirror-like pristine 
~:ognition and Ak~obhya, reversing the earlier sequen~:e. On this distinction, 
see Longchcn Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 390-9 r. 
49· DR, Vol. 3, p. 77, I. 3, reads nang-du. 
50. Tib. mi-rtoR-Pa 'i ngang. Along with bliss and radiance, this 'non-conceptual 
state' is considered to be one of the three ~:oncomitanr experiences associated 
with the practice of the perfection stJgc (sampamzakrama). See Longchen 
Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 827-8. NOTES 
51. The green light associated with Amoghasiddhi is said not to arise until buddha­
a~:uvities can be performed consequent on the attainment of perfe~o:t enlight­
enment. 
52. This 'vision of the four pristine cognitions combined' (ye-shes bzhi-sbyor-gyi 
smmg-ba) is said to occur in relation ro the 'hollow passageway of Vajrasattva' 
(rdo-rje sems-dpa' khong-gseng-gi lam), a synonym for the central channel of 
the body, through which transference of consciousness ( 'pho-ba) is also 
effected. See Tselc Natsok Rangdrol, The Mirror of Mindfulness, p. 20. 
53. Tib. rgyun-gyi ting-nge- 'dzi11; Skt. sroto 'nugatasamiidhi. 
54· Tib. rig-pa /hun-grub chen-po'i sku. See glossary under Buddha-body. 
55· On the wnflarion in this rexr of delusion (Skt. moha; Tib. gti-mug) with both 
the god-realm and the animal realm, see note 44· 
56. On this class of faithful retainers (Tib. gi11g), who prore~:r rhe mal'_l~ala from 
impediments, see also Ch. 7, note 17. 
Part Two 
1. Tib. Khro-bo'i bar-do'i 'char-tshul bstan-pa bzhugs-so. 
2. See Ch. 14. 
3· There are many specific instances of these indications symbolic of passage ro 
the realm of the sky-farces (dag-pa mkha'-spyod) ar the rime of death, particu­
larly in the context of the lineages of Ariyoga. Sec, for example, NSTB, p. 543 
(the death of Bagom), p. 5 50 (the death of Dzeng Dharmabodhi), p. 56 I (the 
death of Zhangron), p. 563 (the death of Nyibum), p. 564 (the death of Guru 
Jober), p. 568 (the death of Melong Dorje), p. 572 (the death of KumJr<ldza), 
and p. 594 (the death of Longchenpa). For a more detailed explanation of 
these phenomena, see Ch. 14, pasmn. 
4· Tib. gsang-lam, i.e. the path of the secret mantras (guhyamantra). 
5· The full text of the Liberation by Wearing: Natural Liberation of the Psycho­
physical Aggregates (bTags-grol phung-po rang-grol) is contained below, 
Ch. 14, pp. 347-79. 
6. The names of the four Female Gatekeepers of rhe wrathful assembly given 
here are identical to those given above, p. 247, in the context of rhe peaceful 
assembly. Their a~o:tual names are Vajratejasi in the cast, Vajramogha in the 
south, Vajralok<l in the west, and Vajravetali in the north, See, above, Ch. 5, 
p. 84. 
7· The colours of Manurak~asi, Brahmar)i, Raudri, Vai~l)<lvi, and Kaumari here 
au:ord with the descriptions inCh. 5, p. 85, and Ch. 6, p. I ro. DR, p. 103, 
depicts them respectively as dark brown, reddish yellow, dark green, blue, and 
red. 
8. DR, p. 103, !.4, reads phag-mgo (pig-headed), bur see Ch. 5, p. 8 5, and Ch. 6, 
p. I 10. 
9· Here the colours of Santi, Am~ta, Saumi, and Daf.19I accord with the deSL:rip­
tions inCh. 5, p. 85, and Ch. 6, p. 110. DR, p. 103, depicts them respe~o:t1vely 
as red, red, white, and dark green. 
1 o. Here the colours of Bhak~asi and Rudhiramadi accord with the descriptions 
inCh. 5, p. 86, and Ch. 6, pp. 110-11. DR, p. 104, dcpi~o:rs them respectively 
as dark green and white. NOTES 
I I. Here the colours of Vayudevi, Agnlyi, Varahi, Vajra Camul)~i, and Varun<il)i 
accord with the descriptions inCh. 5, p. 86, and Ch. 6, p. 1 I 1. DR, pp. 104-
5, describes them respectively as blue, red, black, red, and blue. 
I 2. On this distinction, sec Longchcn Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 397ff., and ibid., 
Ch. I), pp. I075ff. 
13· On the variations in the size of the buddha-body, see R. Kloetsli, Buddhist 
Cosmology, p. 69, and on the varying sizes of the physical bodies of living 
beings within the three world-systems, see the chart in ibid., p. 3 8. The same 
work has much information on the dimensions of Mount Sumcru and its status 
within the world-system. 
I 4· Mistaken views (/og-/t,z) arc principally those which disclaim an appropriate 
connection between virtuous causes and virtuous effects, and those which 
ascribe inherent existence in varying degrees to physical and mental 
phenomena. 
Part Three 
I. Tib. Z..1b-chos zhi-khro dgcmgs-pa r..Ing-grollas srid-pa bar-do 'i ngo-sfnod. 
2. Tib. Smzgs-rgyas-dang byang-clmb sems-dpa 'i-mams-/a ra-mda' sbran-pa 'i 
smon-lam. Sec Ch. 1 2, pp. 308-9. 
3· These verses arc found in Vo1subandhu's Treasury of the Abhidharmu, Ch. 3, 
VV. I)-(4. 
4· Tib. sngcm-'byzmg. 
5. Tib. h..1r-du 'j sn,mg-h..I yJd-kyi Ius. 
6. Tib. dbung-po kun-tsh,mg thogs-med rgyu. 
7· Vajraso1na, the 'indestructible scat' below the Bodhi Tree at present-day Bodh 
Gay<t, the place where the buddhas of the '3uspicious aeon' arc said to attain 
buddh.thood. 
8. Tib. las-kyi rdzu-'phrul slmgs-dang /dan. 
9· The mir.Kulous ability b.1sed on past actions (/as-kyz rdzu-'t,hrul) is an intensi­
fied peru:ptuo1l state ansing from po1st habitual tendencies (vasanJ), quite 
distinct from the four supports for miraculous ability (~ddhipada) or enlight­
ened attributes (gw.z.z) indicative of buddhahood, on which see NSTB, Vol. 2, 
p. I 38. 
IO. Tib. rzgs-mthzm lhu-mig d..1g-pas mthcmg. 
I I. This 'pure cl3irvoy31Kc' (lha-mig d,zg-p,z), like the miraculous ability based on 
past actions (1,15-kyz rdzzt-'phrul) descrihcd above, is a product of the intensified 
perception of the mental body, enabling those destined to one form of rebirth 
to perceive beings of their own kind. As such, it is differentiated from the 
clairvoyance possessed by the gods inhabiting the world-systems of form 
(rupadhJtu) and desire (k.im..IdhJtu), but similar to that which is acquired in 
the course of meditation. 
12. The carnivorous ogres (Tib. srin-po), a~o:ting as the executors of the unfailing 
law of cause and dfcct (las-kyi shu-za), are those who execute the rites of 
Yama (gshin-rJe'i las). Sec Ch. 13, pp. 321ff. 
I 3. The colours of the three precipices symbolic of the dissonant mental states 
(k/da)- white, red, and black-arc also respectively associated with the three 
enlightened families (rigs-gsum) through which they arc purified, i.e. those of 430 
16. 
17. 
!8. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22.. 
2J. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
JO. 
3T. NOTES 
Ak~obhya, who is the natural purity of aversion, Amitabha, who is the natural 
purity of attachment, and Vairocana, who is the natural purity of delusion. 
Sec Ch. 5, p. 97· 
This sentence is omitted in DR, Vol. 3, f. 125, I. 1. 
On the expression lha11-cig skyes-pa'i lha, here rendered as 'innate good con­
science', and the expression lhan-cig skyes-pa'i 'dre, rendered here as 'innate 
bad conscience' sec also Ch. 13, pp. 3 2 Iff. 
On the 'mirror of past actions' (ias-kyi me-long) in which Yama Dharmar<lja 
is said to view the virtuous and non-virtuous actions of the deceased, sec 
below, Ch. 13, pp. 32.1-2. 
The 'bull-headed Raksa' (rag-sha glang-mgo) is the name of one of the acolytes 
of Yarna Dharmaraja: Sec Ch. q, pp. 321ff. 
See glossary. for the Nyingma interpretation of the Buddha-body of Essen­
tiality (rzgo-bo-nyid-kyi sku; Skt. suahhavikakiiya), which some sources regard 
as the 'fourth' buddha-body, sec Dudjom Rinpochc, NSTB, pp. 191ff. 
On the significance of the 'name empowerment' (ming-gi dbang), sec glossary 
under Four Empowcrmcnts. 
The following verses derive from the Aspiraticmal Prayer which Protects from 
fear of the Intermediate States (Bar-do'i 'jigs-skyohs smon-lam). Sec below, 
Ch. 12, pp. 314-15. 
Those cxpcriem.:ing the sensation of moving upwards (gyen-/a 'gro-ba) have 
an affinity with rebirth in the god-realms, those moving horizontally ('ph red-/a 
'gro-ba) have an affinity with the human realms, while those moving down­
wards (mgo mtlmr-la !Jrten-nas 'gro-ba) have an affinity with the hells, 
anguished spirits and animals. See e.g. Longchcn Rabjampa, GGFTC, 
pp. 493-4· 
On these verses from the Root Verses of the Six l11termediate States (Bar-do 
drug-gi rtsa-tshig), sec Ch. J, pp. 33-4. 
Tib. bdag srid-pa bar-do 'char-dus 'dir. 
Tib. mdwz-pa rtse-gcig sems-la hzung-bya. 
Tib. hzang-po /as-kyi 'pino-la narz-gyis mthud. 
Tib. nmga/-sgo hkag-nas ru-log dran-par byal sflying-rus dag-snang dgos-pa'i 
dus gcig yin. 
Tib. hla-ma yah-yum. 
On the practices pertaining to the purification of the four modes of birth 
(skye-gnas rigs bzhi; Skt. c'lturycmi), namely: oviparous birth (sgo-nga-nas 
skye-ha; Skt. a'!cf•zia), viviparous birth (mngal-nas skye-ha; Skt. jarayuja), 
supernormal birth (hrdzus-te skye-ha; Skt. ufJapJduka), and birth from 
warmth and moisture (drod-sher-las skye-ha; Skt. san:zsvedaja), sec Dudjom 
Rinpoche, NSTB, p. 279. Note that the instructions given in our text at this 
juncture refer only to first two categories. 
The clotting of the embryo (mtr-nur-po; Skt. kala/a) and the oval formation 
of the embryo (mer-mer-po; Skt. arhuda) are the first two of the so-called five 
stages of embryonic development (mngal-gyi gnas-skabs /nga). For a more 
detailed, though slightly different, explanation, sec Tibetan Medical Pazfitlngs, 
pp. 25-6 and 181-2.. 
Sec Ch. J, p. 34· 
Tib. bden-med sgyu-ma !ta-bu gdams-ngag. NOTES 43I 
3 2. Tib. 'od-gsal sgoms-nas mngal-sgo 'gag. 
33· On this description of the mind resting in its natural state, which derives from 
the esoteric instructions of the Great Perfection on Cutting through Resistance 
(rdzogs-chen khregs-chod), see Ch. 4· 
34· Tib. mngal-sgo 'dam-pa'i gdams-ngag zab-nw. 
3 5· On the meditative stabilities (samadhi) or meditative concentrations (dhyana) 
which give rise to birth in the world-system of form (rupadhatu), see the chart 
in NSTB, pp. 14-I 5; and for a detailed discussion, see also L. Pruden (trans.), 
Abhidharmakosabha~yulfl, Ch. 3, The World, pp. 365-495. 
3 6. On the transference of consciousness to the pure buddha fields (dag-pa sangs­
rgyas-kyi zhing-du 'pho-ba), see Ch. 10. 
3 7. For a description of such consecration of the womb, see the life of Sakyamuni 
Buddha in Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, p. 416; also GGFTC, p. 474· 
3 8. Sangs-rgyas-dang byang-chub sems-dpa-rnams-la ra-mdar spran-fJa 'i smon­
lam. See below, Ch. 12, pp. 308-9. 
39· For the text of the Root Verses of the Six Intermediate States (Bar-do dmg-gi 
rtsa-tshig), sec above, Ch. 3, pp. 3 2-4; and for that of the Aspirational 
Prayer which Rescues from the Dangerous Pathways of the Intermediate States 
(Bar-do 'phrang-sgrol-gyi smon-lam), see below, Ch. 12, pp. 3 ro-I 3· 
40. For the full text of the Liberation by Wearing: Natural Liberation of Psycho­
physical Aggregates (bTags-grol phung-po rang-grol), see below, Ch. q; and 
for that of the Spiritual Practice: Natural Liberation of Habitual Tendencies 
(Chos-spyod hag-chags rang-groi), see above, Ch. 5· 
12 Aspirational Prayers 
r. Tib. Sangs-rgyas-dang byang-chub sems-dpa' rnams-la ra-mdar spran-pa'i 
smon-lam. 
2. Or she, as appropriate. 
3· Tib. Bar-do 'phrang-sgrol-gyi smon-lam. 
4· DR, pp. 320-21, inserts these verses after those dedicated to Amoghasiddhi. 
5. This mantra, missing in DR, p. 3 2 I, I. 2, is inserted on the basis of its inclusion 
in the Delhi and Yaranasi reprints. 
6. Tib. Bar-do 'i smon-lam 'jigs-skyobs-ma. 
7. As this point the text inserts the following couplet, which has apparently been 
mis-transcribed out of context from the previous aspirational prayer: 
May the fields of the five elements not rise up as a hostile force. 
May I see them as the fields of the five buddhas. 
8. An allusion to the beguiling prophecies of Mara, who sought to deceive 
Sakyamuni at the time of his attainment of buddhahood. 432 NOTES 
13 A Masked Drama 
Part One 
1. Tib. Srid-pa har-dn 'i ngo-sprod dge-sdig rang-gzugs ston-pa 'i gdams-pa srid-pa 
har-do rang-grol. On the variant forms of the title, sec Appendix One. 
2. Tib. Zah-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
3· Tib. Padma zhi-khro 'i har-do thos-grol. On the cycles of gter-ma discovered 
by Karma Lingpa, and the various texts concerning empowerment (dbang­
hskur) and introduction (ngo-sprod) contained within them, see above, 'A 
Brief Literary History', pp. xxxvi-xlviii, and Appendix One. 
4· Here, the inrermcdiate state of reality (chos-nyid har-do) is described as such 
because the luminosities and the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities are directly 
seen, offering the potential for immediate liberation. 
5. Although the introduction to the intermedi~te state of rebirth (srid-pa'i bar-do) 
has already been given (see Ch. II, pp. 273-303), the drama presented here 
functions as a light-hearted didactic supplement to the previous introduction, 
and is directed specifically at the living rather than the deceased. 
6. The acolytes of Yama include the Ox-headed Rak~a Demon (Rak~a 
glang-mgo). 
7· Tib. 'Byung-po spre'u mgo. 
8. The breis the standard Tibetan unit of dry measure, twenty of which equal 
one khal. The sr..mg is the standard unit of weight measurement. 
9· Tib. Dur phag-mgo. 
10. Tib. sDug-pa sbrul-mgo. 
I r. Tib. gTum-po dom-mgo. 
I 2.. Tib. srNgam-pa seng-mgo. 
1). Tib. 'Dab-chags khyung-mgo. 
14· Tib. /han-cig skyes-pa'i /ha. See also Ch. 1 r, p. 2.79. 
1 5· Tib. /han-gcig skyes-pa'i 'dre. See also Ch. 1 I, p. 2.79. 
16. Tib. dPal-skyes. 
17. Tib. dMyal-ba 'hum. 
Ill. On the outcaste (cm_ufiila; Tib. rigs-ngan gdol-pa) community, traditionally 
excluded from Indian society for occupational reasons, see A. L. Basham, The 
Wonder That Was India, pp. 145-7. 
1 9· The four classes of ancient Indian society comprise: the priestly class (brah­
ma~zm,ar'!a); the princely class (k~atriyavar~za); the mercantile class (vaisya­
van.za); and the labouring class (siidravar'!a). See A. L. Basham, The Wonder 
That Was India, pp. 138-45. 
20. On the currency of such materialistic and nihilistic philosophical views in 
ancient India, see Dudjom Rinpochc, NSTB, pp. 66-7; and see A. L. Basham, 
The Wonder That Was India, pp. 298-300. 
21. Tamralipti (zangs-gling) is identified with modern Tamluk on the Bengal q>ast. 
See NSTB, p. 455· 
22.. Tib. shan-pu khri-dpon; also translatable as 'myriarch of butchers'. 
2.J. Tib. slum-mo dpal-skyid. 
2.4. The year of the water pig is the last in the cycle of sixty years, according to NOTES 433 
the calendrical system of elemental divination ( 'byung-rtsis), for which reason 
it will create a 'fin de siecle' notion in the minds of the audience. 
2 5. Kaman1pa in Assam is revered as one of the twenty-four sacred abodes of 
tantric Buddhist India. See NSTB, pp. 472 and 501. 
26. Tib. rje-rigs; Skt. vaisya. See above, note 19. 
27. Tib. rDo-rje gcod-pa (Vajracchedika, T 16). This satra is one of the best 
known of the shorter J>rajnaparamita texts. Its Chinese version is said to be 
the world's oldest extant printed book. 
28. See Ch. 12, pp. 308-9. 
29. See Ch. II, pp. 285-300. 
30. See Ch. 10. 
3 r. See glossary under Six-syllable Mantra. 
32· Tib. dGe-sdig rang-gzugs ston-pa'i gdams-pa {'am me-long} srid-pa [bar-doj 
rang-grol. 
3 3. Skt. subha'!z bhavantu. 
I. 
2. 
3· 
4· 
5· 
6. 
7· 
8. 
9· Part Two 
Tib. Srid-pa'i bar-do'i ngo-sprod dge-sdig rang-gzugs ston-pa'i lhan-thabs 
dbyangs-snyan lha 'i ga~uji. 
Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
See pp. 326-8. 
The mandala of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities would be constructed in two 
or three. dimensions for the performance of this drama and the concomitant 
empowerment ceremonies. 
Seep. 333· 
On the significance of the 'mar:tc:lala of spiralling rainbow lights' (Tib. 'ja'-'od 
'khyil-ba'i dkyil-'khor) for practitioners of the All-surpassing Realisation 
(thod-rgal) meditations of Atiyoga, see Dudjom Rinpoche, NSTB, pp. 337-
43· 
i.e. Namka Chokyi Gyelpo, the spiritual teacher of Gyarawa Namka Chokyi 
Gyatso, who composed this supplement. 
See Ch. 5, pp. 67ff. 
Tib. zang-thal. This expression indicates success in consciousness-transference 
or the direct realisation of inner radiance at death. See above, Ch. ro. 
14 Liberation by Wearing 
I. Tib. bTags-grol phung-po rang-grol-gyi don-bsdus. 
2. Tib. Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol. 
3· O¥ Al;l HO¥ are the essential mantras which liberate mundane body, speech, 
and mind in primordial purity. 
4· This is the naturally resonant mantra of the Buddha Samantabhadra, written 
in the c:lakir:ti script of O<;lc:liyana, in the form of a vajra-song. The c:lakir:ti script 
appears to be only remotely related to Sanskrit. The following interpretation 
of these syllables derives from the Tantra of the Coalescence of Sun and Moon 434 NOTES 
(Nyi-zla kha-sbyor-gyi rgyud, sDe-dge NGB, Vol. 4, p. 119a). for variant 
readings of the mantras, see also 1\;amkhai Norbu, The Dzogchcn Ritu,zl 
Practices, pp. 1 3 2-6; and for irs intonation, ibid., pp. 90-1. Following the 
rantra, the syllables are interpreted by Namkhai Norbu as follows: From the 
very beginning (EMA ), intrinsic awareness has never been born, nor will it ever 
be born (KIRI KIRI). Self-arisen, it has never been interrupted (MAFA), nor 
will it ever be interrupted (BHALIBIIALI). Since it is total vision, it has never 
been clarified, nor will it ever be clarified (sAMITASURUSURU). Being omni­
present, it has never been constructed, nor will it ever be constructed ( K uNo­
HALIMASUMASU). Being unique it is perfectly realised in space through the 
methods of the four signs (EKARI LISUBHASTAYE). It is naruralliberation into 
the great expanse and ir is supreme bliss (CAKIRABIIULJTA). Since it is the 
great expanse, it is habituated to supreme delight (CAYESAMUNTA CARYA­
SUGHAYE). Relaxing the tension of this portion, which is relative existence, 
intrinsic awareness generates everything (BHITISANABIIYAGHULIYE). And 
rhus one transfers directly into the great inner radiance (SAKARIDIIUKANI). 
Brilliant and wondrous, this light radiates (MATARIBHETANA), totally tran­
scending everything, and it eliminates all errors (PARALIIIISANA). In a state of 
being just as it is, it is free from all conceptions (MAKIIARTEKELANA). Being 
perfect, it is like the light of the moon (SAMBIIURATA MAIKACARATAMBA). 
Like the sunlight, it is luminous (sURYAGIIATARAYE BASHANA). It is like a 
jewel, a mountain, a many-petalled lotus (RANABHITI SAGHUTII'AYA). It is 
the great resonance which has never been sounded, and never will be sounded 
(GHURAGHURAI'AGAKIIARANALA~1). It is the primordial state which has 
never been created and never will be created (NARANARAYI THARAPA"fLA~t). 
It is the great enlightened mind which was never adorned and never wdl be 
adorned (SIRNASIRNABHESARASPALA~1). Self-originated and perfect, it will 
never become enlightened (BUDDHABUDDIIA CHISASAGIIELA~t). Ten con­
cluding syllables are focal points of bodily energy (SASA '!-~ ~~ II !\.tA:.tA), 
while the other concluding syllahles arc associated with the buddhJ-bodit~s 
(RARA LAHA A). 
5. This mantra in the form of a vajra-song is included in the Tantra of the 
Coalescence of S1111 and Moon (Nyi-zla kha-sbyor-gyi rgyud, sDe-dge NCB, 
Vol. 4, pp. I I l.)a-b). As before, it is written in the 9aki!)l script of 09~iyana. 
The main verses are preceded by 0~1 A':' HO~t and concluded by the ten 
syllables of bodily energy (SASA ~~ q. 11 MAMA), and those indicati\'e of 
buddha-body (RARA). See Namkhai Norbu, The Dwgchen Ritual Practices, 
pp. I 32-6. 
6. These twenty-five mantras which follow are again rendered in the 9akir)l 
language of 099iyana, as distinct from Sanskrit. 
7· Tib. phyir mi-ldog-pa'i sa. 
8. Tib. nyams-gong 'phel-ba'i sn.zng-ba. 
9· Tib. rig-pa'i tshad-pheb-kyi sn,mg-ba. 
10. Tib. 1zgo-bo rang-bzhin thugs-rjer grol. 
11. Tib. btags-cing dlmgs-la sleb-pa'i tshad grol. 
12. The Delhi reprint (p. 22 5) comments that each of these preceding mantras 
encapsulates the natural sound of reality (chos-nyid rang-sgra) and is capable 
of conferring liberation. As such, these mantras are contrasted with the viJya-!'iOTES 435 
mantra and dhJru'}im.mtra. See Namkhai Norbu, The Dzogchen Ritual Prac­
tices, pp. 128ff. 
I 3. From this point onwards, the mantras are rendered in Sanskrit. On the 'hun­
dred enlightened families of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities' (zhi-klno 
rigs-brgya), see Appendix Two. 
I4. As in all the verses that follow, these events occur when the mantra circle is 
worn at the time of death. 
I 5. The subtle wheel of vibrant mantra letters, vowels and consonants, from which 
the seed-syllables of the various deities are formed. See GGFTC, Ch. 4, 
pp. 544-74· 
I6. The text (p. 265, I. 3-4) reads 'blue' at this juncture. 
17. The Varanasi reprint gives the alternative mantra for Maiijusri: vAGISVARI 
MU¥ SRI SVAHA. 
I 8. The abridged version of this text suggests that subtle relics rather than rainbow 
lights will appear at this juncture, in conformity with the opening verse of this 
section. 
19. For Narti, the alternative form 'Naivedya' (Tib. Zhal-zos-ma) is also found. 
20. Here substantialism (mtshan- 'dzin) refers to the grasping at characteristics, 
having failed to understand that they lack inherent existence. 
21. This verse is omitted in our text, but found in the abridged version. 
22. For a more detailed explanation of the above mantras of the Forty-two Peaceful 
Deities, see Longchen Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 690-96. 
23. The text docs not add significant derail to the description of the mantras of 
the Twenry-cight lsvari. The actual mantras for this series are reproduced 
according to rDor-rJe me-long, Peking Kangyur, Vol. 10, p. 20; but with the 
Sanskrit corrected in accordance with GGFTC, pp. I 124-8. 
24. This verse is omitted in our text, but found in the abridged version. For a 
more detailed explanation of the above mantras of the sixty wrathful deities, 
including a number of variants, see Longchen Rabjampa, GGFTC, pp. 1144-
56. 
2 5. On the nature of these six syllables, which are associated with the six realms 
of existence according to the tradition of the Innermost Spirituality (snying­
thig), see Namkhai Norbu, The Dzogchcn Ritual Practices, p. 123 . 
.z.6. On the Hundred-syllable Mantra of Vajrasattva, see glossary. On the breaches 
of rhe commitments, which it rectifies, see above, Ch. 7; and on the negativity 
and obscurarions, which it purifies, see Ch. 1 and Ch. 6. 
27. On this mantra, generally known as the Heart-mantra of Dependent Origina­
tion, see glossary. 
28. Tib. mgo-'jug ma-log. Here this refers to the importance of folding the paper 
so that the heads and tails of the various letters are not reverted or wrongly 
positioned. 
29. The booklet is then inserted within a golden casket, also known as legs-'bam, 
that may be tied in a top-knot on the yogin's head or worn around the neck. Bibliography 
For abbreviations used occasionally here, see pp. 40 5-6. 
Section One: Canonical Texts 
a) Anthologies 
Kangyur (Tib: bKa'-'gyur; Eng: Collected Translations of the Buddha's Teachings). 
Several editions are extant including the authoritative Derge xylographic edition 
in I03 vols. 
rNying-ma'i rgyud-'bum (Eng: Collected Tantras of the Nyingmapa). Several 
manuscript versions are extant, but only one xylographic edition at Derge in 26 
vols. 
b) Sutras (mdo-sde) 
Avata~sakasutra (Tib: mDo-sde phal-po-che; Eng: Satra of the Great Bounte­
ousness of the Buddhas). T 44, MTfWL I97, translated by T. Cleary, The 
Flower Ornament Scripture, 3 vols. Boulder: Shambhala, 1984 onwards. 
Kara~ujavyuhusatra (Tib: mDo-sde za-ma-tog; Eng: Satra of the Cornucopia of 
Avalokitesvara's Attributes), ed. P. L. Vaidya, Buddhist Sanskrit Texts, 17 
( 1961). T 116, MTIWL 90. 
LankavataraszUra (Tib: mDo-sde lankar gshegs-pa; Eng: Satra of the Descent to 
Lmikd), ed. P. L. Vaidya, Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 3 (1963). T 107, translated by 
D. T. Suzuki, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, I932, 1956, etc. 
Prajtidparamita (Tib: Sher phyin, Eng: Transcendental Perfection of Discriminative 
Awareness): a collective name for a whole genre of siHras, including the three 
longest versions in Ioo,ooo sections (T 8), 25,000 sections (T 9) and 8,ooo 
sections (T 1 2). See MTfWL 208, I 54 and 222 respectively. Extensively trans­
lated by E. Conze. 
Ratnaku(a (Tib: dKon-mchog brtsegs-p,l; Eng: Mound of Precious Gems). J 45-
9 3, MTTWL I 2.2.. Extensive selections are contained in G. C. C. Chang, A 
Treasury of MaiJLiyana Satras: Selections from the Maharatnakara. Pennsylvania: 
PennsylvJnia State University Press, 1983. 
S,mdlmzirmor.:anasutra (Tib: dGongs-pa nges-par 'grel-pa theg-pa chen-po 'i mdo; 
Eng: Satra of the Unravelling of Enlzghtened Intention). T Io6, MTIWL I97· BIBLIOGRAI'HY 437 
Partial translation in John Powers, jnanagarbha's Commentary on the Samdhi­
nirmocana Sutra. 
TJth.igatJgarbhasfttra (Tib: De-bzhin gshegs-pa'i snymg-po 'i mdo; Eng: SzUra of 
the Nucleus of the Tathagata). T 258, MTTWL 23r. 
VajrJcchedika (Tib: rDo-rje gcod-pa; Eng: Diamond Cutter), ed. P. L. Vaidya, 
Buddhist Sanskrit Texts I7 (1961), T I6, translated and edited by E. Conzc, 
Serie Orientale Roma 13 (1957). Retranslated in Red Pine, Diamond Sutra, r--:ew 
York: Counterpoint, 200 I. 
c) Tantras 
Buddhasamayuga (Tib: Sangs-rgyas mnyam-sbyor-gi rgyud; Eng: Tantra of Union 
in Equilibrium with the Buddhas). T 366-7, Dergc NGB Vols. 11-12. 
Guhyagarbha Tantra (Tib: rGyud gsang-ba'i snying-po; Eng: Tantra of the Secret 
Nucleus). T 832, Dergc NGB Vol. 9, ed. and translated in G. Dorje, GGITC, 
1987. 
GuhyasamdJa Tantra (Tib: rGyud gsang-ba 'dus-pa; Eng: Tantra of the Secret 
Assembly), ed. S. Bagchi, Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 9 ( 196 5 ), ed. B. Bhattacharya, 
Gaekwad's Oriental Series, 53 ( 1 967). T 442-3, Derge NGB Vol. I 2. Translated 
by F. fremanrle in A Critical Study of the GuhayasamdJa Tantra, Unpublished 
PhD thesis no. 774 271989, University of London. 
Kun-byed rgyal-po'i rgyud (Eng: Tantra of the All-accomplishing King). T 828, 
Derge NGB Vol. 5· Translated in E. K. Neumaier-Dargyay, Sovereign All-creating 
Mind, Albany: SUNY ( 1992). 
mDo dgongs-pa 'dus-pa (Eng: Szura Which Gathers All Intentions). T 829, Derge 
NGB Vol. 7· 
Nyi-zla kha-sbyor (Eng: Tamra of the Coalescence of Sun and Momz). Derge NGB 
Vol. 4· 
rDo-rje sems-dpa' sgyu-'phrul me-long (Eng: Tantra of the Mirror of the Magical 
Net of Vajrasattua). Derge NGB Vol. I I. 
Sarz;adurgatiparisodhJnJtantra (Tib: Ngan-song sbyong-rgyud; Eng: Tantra of the 
Purification of the Lower Re.;lms). T 48 3, 4 8 5, ed. and translated T. Skorupski in 
The Sarvadurgatiparisodhana Tantra: Elimmation of All Evil Destinies, Motilal 
Banarsidas, 19 8 3. 
sKu-gdung 'bar-ba'i rgyud (Eng: Ta11tr.1 of the Cremation of Corpses). Derge NGB 
Vol. 3· 
Section Two: Commentarial Literature 
a) Anthologies 
Tengyur (Tib: bsTarz-'gyur; Eng: Collected Translations of the Classical Treatises). 
Again there are several extant versions, including the authoritative Derge xylogra­
phic edition in 213 vols. 
rSpng-ma'i bka'-ma (Eng: Collected Teachings of the Nyingmapa). The most 
extensive anthology of Nyingma commenrarial literature, edited by Khenpo 
Jam yang at Karok (I 999) in 1 20 vols. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
b) Commentaries of In die Origin 
Ajitamitragupta, 'Chi slu-ba'i gdums-pa (Eng: Teachings 011 the Rituul Deceptio1l 
of Death). T 28 3 9· 
Mairrcya, Ahhisamayd/a1!1kdra (Tib: mNgo11-rtogs rgyan; Eng: Omammt of 
Emergent Realisatzon). T 3786, MTTWL 2-5. On this work see also Trangu 
Rinpoche, Onz,mzent of Clear Realization, Auckland: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
Publications, 2004, and Lati Rinbochay et a/., Meditative States i11 Tzbetan 
Buddhism, London: Wisdom, 1982. 
Nagarjuna, PraJ1iiindmumulamadhyamakakarikd (Tib: dBu-ma rtsa-ba 'i tshig-le'ur 
byas-pa shes-rah ces-bya-ba; Eng: Root Stanzas of the Madhyamaka e11titled 
Discrmunative Awareness), ed. P. L. Vaidya, Buddhist Sanskrit Texts zo ( 1960). 
T 3 82.h translated in F. J. Streng, Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meuning, 
Nashville/:--.lew York: Abingdon, 1967, and by K. Kalupahana, Malamadhya­
makakJrikJs, Albany: SU.:--.;Y, 1986. 
Santarak~ita, Tattuasa1!1graha (Tib: De-nyid hsdus-pa; Eng: Compendium of 
Topics). T 4266, ed. D. Shastri, Baudha Bharati Series 1-2 (I 968 ), translated by 
G. Jha, Gaekwad's Oriental Series 8o ( 19 3 7), 8 3 ( 19 39 ). --Madhyamakalm?zk,ira (Tib: dBu-ma rgyan; Eng: Ornament of the Middle 
Way). T 3 884, ed. and translated in Masamichi lchigo, Madhyamukalan_zkJra, 
Kyoto: Kyoto Sangyo University, I98 5· 
Tathagararak~ita, M~tyu~Jdhapaka (Tib: 'Chi-ba bslu-ba; Eng: Ritual Deceptwn of 
Death). T 1 702. 
Tilop;l, -~~ufdharmop.zdes,z (Tib: ."".fJro chos-drug; Eng: The Six Doctrines of NJr­
opd). T 2)30. See H. V. Guenther, The Life and Teaching of Niiropd. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, I 96 3. 
Vagisvarakirti, Mrtyuvaiicanopadesa (Tih: 'Chi-ba bslu-ba; Eng: Esoteric Instruc­
tions on the Ritual Deception of Death). T 1748. 
Vasubandhu, Ahhidharmakosa (Tih: Chos-mgon pa'i mdzud; Eng: Treasury of the 
Abhidharma), ed. D. Shastri, Baudha Bharati Series 5-8 ( 1970-72). T 4089, 
French translation by L. de Ia Vallee-Poussin, L 'Abhidharmakosa de Vasu­
handlm, 6 vols., Paris, Paul Geuthner, 192 3-3 6. English translation by L. Pruden, 
AbhidharmakosabhJsyan.z, 4 vols. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1988. 
c) Commentaries of Tibetan Origin 
Dudjom Rinpoche, bsTan-pa'i mam-gzhag (Eng: Fundamentals of the Nyingma 
Schoo/). Translated in NSTB. 
Gampopa, Duags-po th,zr-rgyan (Eng: The Jewel Omament of Liberation). Trans­
lated by H. V. Geunther, Berkeley: Shambhala, 197r. 
Gendun Gyeltsen, gTer-ston lung-bstan-dang khungs-btsun-pa bla-ma brgyud-pa'i 
rim-pa-mams (Eng: Padmasamhhava's Prophecy of the Treasure-finder an.d the 
Series of Authentic Lineage Teachers). Contained in DR, Vol. 1, pp. 21-6. 
Gyarawa Namka Chokyi Gyeltsen, rGyud-f'a'i lo-rgyus bsdus-pa nor-bu'i 
phreng-ba (Eng: ]ell'el Garland: An Abridged History of the Lineage). Contained 
in DR, Vol. r, pp. 27-48. BIBLIOGRAPHY 439 
Longchen Rabjampa, Grub-mtha' mdzod (Eng: Treasury of Spiritual and Philo­
sophical Systems), ed. Dodrup Chen Rinpoche, Gangtok, Sikkim, c. 1969. --gNas-lugs mdzod (Eng: Precious Treasury of the Way of Abiding), trans. 
Richard Barron, Padma Publications, 1987. 
l\:gari Parychen, sDom-gsum rnam-nges (Eng: Ascertainment of the Three Vows). 
Contained in f',;K, Vol. 51. See HH Dudjom Rinpoche's commentary in Perfect 
Conduct: Ascertaining the Three Vows, Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1996. 
Patrul Rinpoche, mKhas-pa'i shri rgyal-po mkhas-chos, in the Collected Works of 
Patrul Or}:,')'all}igme Chokyi \~?angpo (dPal-sprul gswzg-'bum), Vol. 5, pp. 2.06-
25. On this text, see HH Dalai Lama, 'Hitting the Essence in Three Words', in 
Dzogchen: The Heart Esse11ce of the Great Perfection, pp. 61-92, Snowlion, 
woo; also Khcnpo Palden Sherab and Khenpo Tscwang Dongyal, Lion's Gaze, 
Sky Dancer Press, 1999. 
Tscle Natsok Rangdrol, Bar-do spyi-don thams-cad rnam-pa gsul·bar byed-pa 
dra11-pa'i me-long (Eng: Mirror of Mindfubzess Clarzfymg All Aspects ol the 
lntermediute Stutes), translated by Erik Schmidt Perna Kunsang in The Mzrror 
of Mindfulness, Kathmandu: RangJung Yeshe Publications, 1987. 
d) Treasure-doctrines (gter clws) 
Guru Chowang (disc), bKa'-brgyaJ gsang-ba yo~tgs-rd::ogs (Eng: Eight Transmztted 
Precepts: Consummution of All Secrets). Contained in bKa'-brgyad phyogs­
bsgrigs, 4 vols. --bKa'-brgyad drag-po rang-hyung-ba'i zhi-khro na-rag skong-bzhags-gyi 
cho-ga, translated by K. Dowman, 'Emptying the Depths of Hell', in Flzght of 
the Garuda, pp. 53-61. 
Jamgon Kongtrul (redactor), Rin-chen gter-nzdzod (Eng: Store of Precious Trea­
sures), recently republished at Derge in 76 vols. 
Jigme Lingpa (disc.), Klong-chen snying-thig (Eng: Innermost Spirituality of Long­
chenpa), contained in the Collected Works of jzgnze Lingpa, Vols. 7-8, repub­
lished in 3 vols., New Delhi: l\:gawang Sopa, 1973. Selections translated in 
Tulku Thondup, The Dzugchen Innermost Essence Preliminary Practice (ed. B. 
Beresford), Dharamsala: Tibetan Library of Works and Archives, 1982; The 
Assembluge of the Knowledge-holders, Shantiniketan, WB, 1980; and in The 
Queen of Great Bliss, Gangtok: Dodrup Chen Rinpoche, 1982. 
--Rig 'dzin thugs-sgrub dfJal-chen 'dus-pa, contained in Klong-chcn snying-thig, 
Vol. 1, pp. 616ff. --sKu-gsum zhi11g-khams sbyong-ba'i smon-lam, contained in Klong-chen 
snpng-thig, Vol. 2., pp. 448-52· 
Karma Lingpa (disc.), Zab-chos zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-grol (Eng: Peaceful and 
\'i/rathful Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, fentztledj Natural Liberation 
through [Recognitzmz ofl Enlzghtened Intention). Several recensions arc extant. 
B. J. Cuevas lists eighteen printed and manuscript versions of Tibetan and 
sub-Himalayan provenance. These include the most extensive and authoritative, 
DR, the full contents of which are listed in Appendix One, pp. 383-8. --sKongs-bshags ~tyams-chags rang-grol fgyi dba11g-bskur gnas-spar 'gro-drug 
rang-grolf (Eng: Nutural Liberation through the Propcllmg of the Szx Classes of 440 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Beings mtu Htghcr Rebtrth: The {A1tddle-lengthj Empuwerments of the Natural 
Lthcratwn of Degenerated Commitments through Reparation and Confession), 
~.:omained in DR, Vol. 1, pp. 127-60. --dB.mg-'bring (Eng: Middle-length Empowerment). See the previous entry. --hsKang-hshags nyams-chag rang-grol-gyi tshe-'das gnas-'dren 'gro-drug rang-
grol (Eng: Natural Liberation of Degenerated Commitments through Reparation 
and Con/ession: The Natural Liberation of the Six Classes of Living Beings 
through the Guidance of the Deceased to Higher Rebirth), contained in DR, 
Vol. 2, pp. I-50. --rDzogs-rim bar-do drug-gi khrid-yig (Eng: Six Guidebooks of the Perfection 
St,lge), contained in DR, Vol. 2, pp. 303-432. Translated by Alan Wallace and 
Gyatrul Rinpoche in Natural Liberation. --Bur-do thos-grol chen-rna (Eng: The Great Liberation by Hearing in the 
lntermedt1.1te St,ltes, i.e. the Tibetan Book of the Dead), an abridgement of Karma 
Lingpa's revelations, extant in several edition_s- B. J. Cuevas lists eleven printed 
and manuscript versions of Tibetan and sub-Himalayan provenance. These 
indude the Amdo edition, the Delhi reprint and the Varanasi reprint. The text is 
fully translated in the present work for the first time. Earlier partial translations 
were made by Kazi Dawa Samdup, in W. Y. Evans-Wentz, ed., Tibetan Book 
of the Dead, London/Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 1927; by 
hances~.:a hemantle and Chogyam Trungpa, Tibetan Book of the Dead, Berke­
ley/London: Shambhala, 1 •n 5; by Robert Thurman, Tibetan Book of the Dead, 
Aquarianffhorsons, I 994; and by Stephen Hodge and Martin Boord, Illustrated 
Tthetan Book of the Dead, New York: Godsfield Press, 1999. --Thugs-rie chen-po padma zhi-khro (Eng: Great Compassionate One: Lotus 
Peaceful and \'f/r,lthful Deities). ~A. but extracts of a rediscovered treasure 
(yang-gter) of the same title, revealed by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, are found 
in the Rin-chen gter-mdzod, Vol. 34· pp. 235-432. 
Longchen Rabjampa (disc./redisc.), sNying-thtg ya-bzhi (Eng: Four-part Innermost 
Spmtuality), containing the Bla-ma yang-ttg, the Bi-ma snying-thig, the 
mKha'-'gro yang-ttg, the mKha'-'gro snying-thig, and Zab-mo yang-tig. Derge 
xylographic edition in 4 vols., republished in Delhi by Sherab Gyalrsen Lama 
(I 97 5) in I 3 vols. Catalogue by S. Goodman in 'The Klong-chen snying-thig: An 
Eighteenth-century Tibetan Revelation', Appendix B. 
Orgyan Lingpa (disc.), Padma bka'-thang shel-brag-ma (Eng: The lniunctions of 
Padma, discovered at Cr)•stal Rock), Chengdu: Sichuan Nationalities Publishing 
House, 1987. Translated in G. C. Toussaint, Le Diet de Padma, Bibliothequc de 
I'Institut de Hautcs Etudes Chi noises, Vol. 3, Paris: Libra ire Ernest Leroux, 19 3 3; 
and inK. Douglas and G. Bays, Life ,md Liberation of Padmasambhaua, 2 vols., 
Emeryville, California: Dharma Publications, 1~n8. 
Prahevajra (disc.), Tshig-gsum gnad-du brdeg-pa (Eng: Three Points Which Pene­
trate the Essential). Contained in Bi-ma snying-thig, Pt. I, Vol. Ga, pp. 304-18. 
Section Three: Secondary Sources 
Basham, A. L., The Wonder Thut Was India, 3rd edn, London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 
Jl)6?. 
Heyer, S., The Cult ofT,irJ, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978. Bl B LIOGRAPHY 441 
Blezer, H., Kar glin zz khro: A Tantnc Buddhist Concept, Leiden: Resean.:h School 
c~ws, 1997. 
Chokyi I':yima Rinpoche, The Bardo Guzdebook (trans. Eric Schmidt Perna Kun­
sang), Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 1991. 
Coleman, G. P. (ed.), A Handbook ofTzbeta7t Culture, London: Rider, 1993. 
Cuevas, B. J., The Hid.:ien History of the Tibetan Book of the Dead, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2003. 
--'A Textual Survey of the gter ma of Karma-gling-pa: Zab chos zhi khro dgongs 
pas rang grol and Bar do thos grol chen mo', in Tibetan Studies: Proceedings 
of the Eighth Seminar of the Intenz.Jtional Association for Tibetan Studies, 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press (forthcoming). 
HH Dalai Lama, Dzogchoz: The Heart Essence of the Great Perfection, Ithaca, 
New York: Snowlion Publications, 2000. --Advzce on Dying and Living a Better Life, London: Rider, 2002. 
HH Dilgo Khyenste Rinpoche, Pure Appearance (trans. Ani Jinpa), Halifax: Vajra 
Yairochana Translation Committee, 1992. 
Dorje, G., The Guhyagarbhatattvat,iniscayamahatantra and its X/Vth-century 
Tibetan Commentary Phyogs bcu num sel, 3 vols., unpublished PhD thesis, 
University of London, 1987. --'The Nyingma Interpretation of Commitment and Yow', in The Buddhist 
Forum, Vol. 2 (1991), pp. 71-95. --Tibetan Elememal Divination Paintings: 1//uminated Manuscripts from The 
White Beryl ofSangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, with the Moonbeams treatise of Lo-chen 
Dhann.1sr1, London: Eskenasi and Fogg, 200 r. 
Dowman, K., Flight of the Garuda. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1994· 
HH Dudjom Rinpoche, The Nyingma School of Tzbeta7z Buddhism: Its Fundamen­
tals and History, translated by G. Dorje and M. Kapstein, Boston: Wisdom 
Publications, 1991. 
--Counsels from My Heart (translated by Padmakara Translation Committee), 
Boston: Shambhala, 2001. 
Eckel, M. D., ]n.in.Jgarbha's Commentary on the Disti11ction between the Two 
Truths, Albany: SUNY, 1987. 
Epstein, L., 'On the History and Psychology of the "das-log", in Tibet Journal, 7·4 
(1982), pp. 20-85. 
Fremantle, F., Lummous Emptiness: Understanding the Tibetan Book of the Dead, 
Boston: Shambhala, 2001. 
Germano, D., 'Dying, Death, and Other Opportunities', in D. S. Lopez Jr (ed.), 
Religions of Tibet in Practice, Princeton University Press, 1997. 
Gethin, R., The Fowzd.Jtions of Buddhism, Oxford University Press, 1998. 
Kazi, Sonam T. (trans.), Kun-zang La-may Zh.1l-lung, 2 vols., Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey: Diamond Lotus Publications, 1989. 
Kloetzli, R., Buddhist Cosmology, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1983. 
Kritzer, R., 'Amarabhava in the Vibha~a ·,in Notom Domu Joshi Dazgaku Kirisuto­
kyo Bzmka Kenkyujo Kiyo [Maranata/, 3·5 (1997), pp. 69-91. 
Lalou, M., 'Chemins du mort dans lcs croyances de haute-asie', in Revue de /'His­
loire des Religions, 135.1 (1949), pp. 42-8. 
Lati Rinpoche and J. Hopkins, Death, Intermediate State and Rebirth in Tibetan 
Buddhzsm, Ithaca, New York: Snowlion, 1979. 
Mullin, G., Deuth and Dying: The Tibetan Tradition, Boston: Arkana, 1986. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Namkhai Norbu (trans. Brian Beresford), The Dzogchen Ritual Practices, London: 
Kailash Editions, 1991. 
Norbu, T., The Small Golden Key, New York: Jewel Publishing House, 1977. 
Orofino, G., Sacred Tibetan Teachings on Death and Liberation, Dorset: Prism 
Press, I 990. 
Paltrul Rinpoche, The Words of My Perfect Teacher (trans. Padmakara Translation 
Committee), San Francisco: HarperCollins, I994· 
Parfionovitch, Y., Dorje, G., and Meyer, F., Tibetan Medical Paintings, London: 
Serindia, I992. 
Pommaret, F., Les Revenants de /'au-de/a dans le monde tibetain: Sources litteraires 
et tradition vivante, Paris: Editions du Centre National de Ia Recherche Sciemi­
fique, I989. 
Reynolds, J. M., Self-liberation through Seeing with Naked Awareness, New York: 
Station Hill Press, 1989. 
Sogyal Rinpoche, The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying, San Francisco: 
HarperCollins, I992. 
Tenga Rinpoche, Transition and Liberation (trans. Alex Wilding), Osterby: Khampa 
Buchverlag, I 996. 
Tenzin Wangyal, Wonders of the Natural Mind, New York: Station Hill Press, 
I993· 
Wallace, A., and Gyatrul Rinpoche, Natural Liberation: Padmasambhava's Teach-
ings on the Six Bardos, Boston: Wisdom Publications, I998. 
Wayman, A., The Buddhist Tantras: New Light on Indo-Tibetan Esotericism, 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973· 
Williams, P., Mahayana Buddhism, London/New York: Routledge, 1989. 
--The Reflexive Nature of Awareness: A Tibetan Madhyamaka Defence, Surrey: 
Curzon, 1998. Glossary of Key Terms 
(Words in bold type can be referenced elsewhere in the glossary; Tibetan and 
Sanskrit words arc given in italics and text names in italics. For a description of the 
meditational deities forming the mary<:Jala of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities see 
Appendix Two.) 
Abhidharma mngon-pa'i chos 
This is a generic term referring to the classical Buddhist literature on phenomen­
ology, psychology, epistemology, and cosmology. 
Abhirati mngon-par dga'-ba, Skt. Abhirati 
The eastern buddha field of Manifest Joy is the pure realm associated with the male 
buddha Ak~obhya- Vajrasattva. 
Abiding Nature of Reality gnas-lugs 
The 'abiding nature of reality' is a synonym for emptiness as well as the expanse of 
actual reality (dharmadhatu). 
Absence of Self-identity bdag-med, Skt. nairatmya 
See Selflessness. 
Accomplished Master grub-thob, Skt. siddha 
An accomplished master is one who has fully developed the supreme and common 
spiritual accomplishments. 
Accomplishment dngos-grub, Skt. siddhi 
Spiritual accomplishments may be supreme or common. The former (mchog-gi 
dngos-grub) refers to the accomplishment of enlightenment or buddhahood. The 
latter (thun-mong-gi dngos-grub) arc a series of mystical powers gained through 
meditative practices, which are based on mantra recitation in the context of specific 
rituals. 
Accumulation tshogs, Skt. sambhara 
The Tibetan word tshogs generally has two senses, corresponding to the Sanskrit 
sambhara and ga!Ja. In the former case it refers to the two accumulations of 
merit (Tib. bsod-nams-kyi tshogs, Skt. pu'!yasambhara) and pristine cognition (Tib. 
ye-shes-kyi tshogs, Skt. jfzanasambhara), which are gathered by bodhisattvas on the 
path to buddhahood. The fulfilment of the 'two accumulations' constitutes the 
fruition of the entire path, according to the Greater Vehicle (Mahayana), resulting 
in the maturation of the Buddha-body of Form (rupakaya) and the Buddha-body 444 GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
of Reality (dharmakJy.z) respectively. For the second meaning of tshogs, see Feast­
offering. 
Accumulation of Merit bsod-nams-kyi tshogs, Skt. pu'Jyasambhiira 
See Merit. 
Actual Reality chos-nyid, Skt. dhamz,ztJ 
According to the Greater Vehicle or MahayJna Buddhism, actual reality is a syn­
onym for emptiness (sunyata), which refers to the ultimate nature of reality. See 
also Apparent reality. 
Aeon bskal-pa, Skt. kalpa 
The aeon is a fundamentally important concept in the traditional Indian and Buddh­
ist understanding of cyclical time. According to Abhidhanna literature, a great aeon 
(mahakalpa) is divided into eighty lesser or intervening aeons. In the course of one 
great aeon, the external universe and its sentien.t life-forms unfold and disappear. 
During the first twenty of the lesser aeons, the universe is in the process of creation 
and expansion (uwart.Jk.l!pa); during the next twenty it remains created; during the 
third twenty, it is in the process of destruction or contraction (samuartakalpa); and 
during the last quarter of the cycle, it remains in a state of destruction. 
Aggregate phung-po, Skt. skandha 
A general philosophical term referring to the principal psycho-physical components 
which constitute the mind-body complex of a sentient being. Buddhist literature 
speaks of five such components, technically known as the five psycho-physical 
aggregates (p.uicaskandha). These are: the aggregate of form (rztpaskandha), the 
aggregate of feelings (vedanask.mdha), the aggregate of perceptions (sat!lj1iJs­
kandha), the aggregate of motivational tendencies (sm!zskaraskandha), and the 
aggregate of consciousness (viJ1itinaskandha). The Tibetan term phzmg-po, like its 
Sanskrit counterpart, literally means a 'heap' or a 'pile', an aggregate of many 
parts. Sentient beings in the desire and form realms manifestly possess all the five 
aggregates and those in the formless realm only the four mental aggregates. 
Aggregate of Consciousness nzam-par shes-pa'i phung-po, Skt. uijfzanask .. mdha 
In the context of our text the aggregate of consciousness comprises the so-called 
'eight classes of consciousness' (nzam-shes tshogs-brgyad). These are: 1) the ground­
of-all consciousness (kzm-gzhi rnam-par shes-pa), which is an undifferentiated foun­
dational consciousness underlying all the other aspects of consciousness in which 
are stored the imprints left by past experiences; 2) the deluded consciousness (nyon­
mong yid-kyi nzam-par shes-pa), which is pervaded by fundamental ignorance and 
is responsible for our sense of selfhood and dualistic misapprehension of the true 
nature of phenomena; 3) the mental consciousness (yid-kyi rnam-par shes-pa), 
which obJectively refers to mental constructs, thoughts and the experience of our 
senses; 4) visual consciousness (mi}:-gi rnam-par shes-pa); 5) auditory consciousness 
(nza'i mam-par shes-pa); 6) olfactory consciousness (srza'i rnam-par shes-{Ja); 7) 
gustatory consciousness (/c:e'i rnam-par shes-pa); and H) tactile consciousness (Jus­
kyi rnam-par shes-pa). 
Aggregate of Feelings tshor-ba'i phzmg-po, Skt. uedanaskandha 
The aggregate of feelings encompasses the pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral sen­
sations which arise as an immediate reaction to objects of our senses. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 445 
Aggregate of Form gzugs-ky1 fJIJimg-po, Skt. nipaskandha 
The aggregate of form includes both the subtle and manifest forms derived from 
the clements and experienced through the five senses, including, of course, our 
budics and the environment. The aggregate of form is considered to have fifteen 
aspeas, namely those related to the clements, earth, water, fire and w1nd; those 
related to the five sense objects, visual forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and contacts; 
those rci.lted to the five sense-organs, eye, car, nose, tongue, and body, and, lastly, 
that aspect related to imperceptible forms which arc sJid to be continuously present 
throughout past, present and future time. 
Aggregate of Motivational Tendencies 'du-byas-kyi phung-pu, Skt. 
sat!lsktiraskandha 
The aggregate of motivational tendencies, sometimes translated also as 'mental 
formations', refers to the array of spec1fic types of causative mental states which 
g1vc nsc to our characteristic perspectives and emotions and which m turn cond1t1on 
our act1ons. These are the motivating impulses behmd our thoughts, speech and 
actions which rel.ne in specific \vays to the perceived object. This aggregate includes 
the numerous modalities of the mmd, such as the fifty-one mental factors listed in 
the abbidhanna texts, as well as our habits, dispositions, and conceptualisanon 
tendencies. 
Aggregate of Perceptions 'du-shes-kyi phung-po, Skt. St.lf!liiitiskandha 
The aggregate of perceptions recognises and identifies forms and objects. It differen­
tiates one form/obJeCt from another and n.uncs them. This process includes exten­
sive, mmute, and mediocre modes of objectifying perception. 
AkaniHha 'og-mm 
The central buddha field of Akam~rha (lit. the 'Highest'), also known as the Dense 
Array (Ghanauy1iha), is the pure realm associated with the male buddha Vairucan,z. 
Alakavati lcang-lo-can 
A/,zkJL'ati is the name of the abode of the male bodhisattva Vajrapa1.1i. 
All-surpassing Realisation thod-rgal, Skt. L')'lllkrant.;ka 
Sec under Cutting through Resistance. 
Altruistic Intention to Attain Enlightenment sems-bskyed, Skt. cittotptid.I 
See Bodhicitta. 
Ancillary Commitments yan-lag-gi dam-tshig 
See Commitments. 
Anguished Spirits yi-dt·,zgs, Skr. preta 
Among the six classes of living beings, the anguished ~pirits are chara(tensed as 
being in a state of existence whiCh, 111 terms of the degree of suffering, is intermedi.ue 
to the animal and hell realms. Born as a result of a preponderance of miserliness in 
their past actions, they are ch.uacteriscd by unsatisfied cravmg. 
Antigod lha-ma-yin, Skt. asura 
One of six classes of living beings ( 'gro-ba rigs-drug). The mode of being and Jctiviry 
of the antigods is said to be engendered and dominated by envy, self-centred ambition 
and hostility. They are metaphorically described as being incessantly embroiled in a 
dispute with the gods (Skt. deu.;ls11ra) over the possession of a magiCal tree. G L 0 S SA R Y 0 r K E Y T E R .\t S 
Anuyoga rJCS su mal-"hyor 
The e1ghth of the nine vehicles, and second of the three inner classes of tantra, 
according to the Nyin~:ma school of Tibetan Buddhism. Anuyuga emphasises the 
perfection stage of meditation (sampannakrama). 
Apparent Reality chus-can, Skt. Jharmin 
According to the Greater Vehicle, the apparent reality of phenomena refers to the 
world of conventional truth characterised by duality, cause and effect and multi­
plicity. This is contrasted with the actual reality, whid1 is the ultimate nature of 
phenomena. See Two Truths. 
Arhat Jgra-bcom-pa 
A being who has attained freedom from the cycle of existence (samsdra) by eliminat­
ing the karmic tendencies and the dissonant mental states which give rise to compul­
sive existence in a cycle of death and rebirth. Arhut, literally 'worthy', is interpreted 
to mean 'Foe Destroyer', the foe in this context being the dissonant mental states 
which are at the root of our conditioned existence. The status of an arhat is the 
ideal goal to which practitioners of the Lesser Vehicle aspire. An individual person 
who becomes an arhat has still nor become a fully enlightened buddha. This is 
because the attainment of buddhahood requires, in addition to the elimination of 
the dissonant mental states, a total overcoming of all the habitual tendencies 
imprinted upon our mentill continuum by our long association with deluded states 
of mind. In other words, the attainment of full enlightenment requires the total 
overcom1ng of illl personal limitations, which can be achieved only through a path 
that possesses the unification of the skilful means of universal compassion together 
with the discriminative awareness directly perceiving the actual nature of reality, at 
the must profound level. 
Ascending and Core-penetrating yar-gyi zang-thal 
According to Atiyoga, the ilttainment of the Buddha-body of Reality (dharmakJy,l) 
is described as 'ascending and core-penetrating' (yar-g)•i zang-thal). Here, 'ascend­
ing' (yar-g)•J) refers to the upwo1rd movement of consciousness through the central 
channel of the body and the consequent 'core-penetrating' to the transformation of 
consciousness into the pristine cognition of reality's expanse (dharmadhJttt}1iJna). 
Atiyoga shin-tu mal-'byor 
The highest or ninth of the nine vehicles, and the third of the three inner classes of 
tantra, a(cording to the Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism, which is otherwise 
known as the Great Perfection (rdzogs-pa chen-po). Sec Great Perfection. 
Attachment 'dod-chags, Skt. rJga 
One of the 'three poisons' (dug-gsum) of the mind, along with delusion and aversion. 
In its extreme manifestation, in the form of insatiable craving, it is said to character­
ise the worlds of the anguished spirits (prctaloka). 
Aural Lineage of Authoritative Personages gang-zag snymz-brgyud 
One of the six lineages through which the Buddhist teachings are transmitted. The 
aur.tl lineage of authorit.nivc persons refers to the historical line of accomplished 
mastcr'i who h.t vc been responsible for aurally transmitting the Buddhist teachings 
throu~h SliLU:ssive generations. GLOS~ARY OF KEY TER~S 447 
Auspicious Aeon hsk.z/-p,; bz,;11g-po, Skr. bh,;Jr.zkulpa 
The name of the present aeon of time, dunng which one thous.:md buddhas are 
predicted to appear in su.:ce~s1on. Among thc~e, S.ikyamuni Buddha is reg.uded as 
the fourth and Maitrt?)•a as the fifth. 
Avalokitdvara spy.m-ras gvgs dh,;ng-phyug 
Av,;/okitesl'ura is regarded JS the embodiment of the compassionate aspect of the 
mind of all the buddhas, manifesting in the form of a meditational deity. He is 
revered as the patron deity of Tibet and h<1s m3ny different aspects, the most 
popubr including the se<lted four-armed white form and 'thousand-armed' form 
Mahakaru~tika. Our text refers to Aualokltc5l!ara as one of the eight principal male 
bodhisattvus. See Appendix Two, p. 393· 
Aversion ::.he-sd.mg, Skr. due~u 
One of the 'three poisons' (dug-gsum) of the mind. In Buddhist litcr3ture, the 
terms .1version <1nd hatred arc often used interchangeably w1th anger. In its subtle 
manifestation 3vcrsion is s3id to obstruct an individu31 trom a correct perception 
of forms. In its extreme manifest3tion, 3S overwhelmmg hatred and fear, it is said 
to he characteristic of the worlds of the hells (narablok.z). 
Awareness rig-pa, Skr. uidyti 
As an ordinary verb, the Tibetan term rig-p.z means 'to know' or 'to be aware'. 
When used as a noun, It has several distinct though not unrel3ted meanings, corre­
sponding to the Sanskrit z·zdy.i: I) as a gener31 term encompassing all experiences 
of consciousness and mental events, 2) as intelligence or mental aptitude, 3) as a 
science or knowledgc-h3sed discipline, 4) as a pure awareness. Our text generally 
assumes the last of these meanings, in whi~.:h cases it IS 3 synonym or 3hbrcviation 
for intrinsic awareness (rullg-ng). See under Intrinsic Awareness. 
Awareness Holder rig-'dzin, Skt. vidyadhura 
The awareness holders or knowledge holders arc embodiments of the gre3t accom­
plished masters who have attained the highest realisations of the tautrus. Amongst 
those whose accomplishments are classified as supr<lmundane arc Padmasambhava 
and Vimalamitra, who h.tve trans~.:ended the span of human life, having attained 
the rainbow body through the practices of the Great Perfection. Five kinds of 
awareness holder arc particularly identified, and their realisations are said to parallel 
those of the bodhisutti•a and buddha levels, namely the awareness holders of 
matur.nion, those with power over the life~pan, those abiding on the levels, those 
of the c;reat Seal, and those of spontaneous presence. 
Basic Commitments rts.z-ba'i d.zm-tshig, Skt. mlllusamJya 
See Commitment. 
Beguiling Forces hdud, Skt. nz.ira 
Sec Malevolent Forces. 
Being of Commitment dum-tshig sems-dp.z', Skt. s.znz.zyas.zttva. 
\Vhen deities are v1sualiscd in meditation, the form of the deity that is visually 
generated hy the meditator is known as the Being of Commitment. This is differen­
tiated from the Being of Pristine Cognition (jii.znasattua, Tih. ye-shes scms-dpa') or 
the actual meditational deity, wh1ch IS inv1ted to enter into the visualised form. G I. 0 S SA R Y 0 F KEY T E R ~~ S 
Being of Pristine Cognition ye-shes sems-dfJu ·, Skt. Jli,in.;s.;ttua 
Sec above under Being of Commitment. 
Bewildered Perception 'klmt!-sn.mg 
The bewildering perceptions generated by the subject-obJect dichotomy. 
Bewilderment 'klmtl-JJu, Skt. bhrJnti 
Bewilderment is the confusion arising from the subject-obJect dichoromy and fun­
damental ignorance, on the bas1s of which rebirth in cyclic existence is perpetuated. 
Bewitchcrs 'gong-pu 
A c.:lass of malign spirits that are thought to frequent the atmosphere and the 
earth, many of whom were bound under an oath of allegiance to Buddhism by 
Padmasambhava Juring the eighth century. Their power to generate lite-threatening 
obstades, to assail bere.wed persons, and so forth can be averted by counteracting 
rituals. 
Bhai~ajyaguru smJn-h/,z 
See Vai9uryaprabharaja. 
Blessing lryin-rlahs, Skt. .zdhi~~hJ11J 
In the Buddhist context, the term bless1ng should not be understood in terms of 
grace as in the case of theistic religions. Rather, it relates to the sense of inspir.nion 
received from an external source, which transforms or awakens the potentials 
inherent within an individual's ment.1l continuum. Thus, the Tibetan word lrym­
r!Jbs is Interpreted to mean: 'to be tr.111sformed through insp1ring magmticence'. 
Blood-drinking [Heruka] khrJg-'tlm11g fhe-ru-k..Jj, Skt. hauk..z 
The Sanskrit word hauka is interpreted to mean 'one who delights 111 drinking 
blood' or 'one who holds a skull tilled with blood', symbohsmg the wrathful 
dynamic transformation of the Jeep-seated dissonant mental states. 
Blood-filled skull Jwzg-dm.zr, Skt. bh,mdh.llbhJ~z,j.;k,z 
In tantric Iconography, meditational deities are often depicted holding skull-cups 
filled with blood. The human skull symbolises mortality and impermdnence while 
the blood represents the transmutation of dissonant mental states mto pristine 
cognition. 
Bodhicitta bya11g-dmb-ky1 sems 
An altruistic intention or aspiration to attain full enlightenment for the benefit of 
all beings. Bodhicitt,z is cultivated on the basis of ..:ertain mental attitudes, principal 
among them being the development of love and great compassion towards all being<; 
equally. The Tibetdn tradttion speaks of two In.l)Or sy!.tems tor tr.unm~ one's mind 
in the generation of hodlncitta: the first is AtrsJ's 'seven-point cause and effect' and 
the second is .SJntHit'I'.Z's 'equdlity and exchange of oneself With others'. A genuine 
generation of bodl11ottu is attained only when, through the traming of the mind, 
the aspiration to .1tta1n iull enlightenment becomes spontaneous and no longer 
requ1res any deliberate exertion. At that stage the individual becomes a budhisaN~a. 
Literally, I}(JCilll means 'enlightenment', and citt.;, 'mind'. The literature of the 
Greater Vehicle spe;tks of two types of bodiJiotta: the conventional bodhicitta and 
the ulum.He hudhzcztta. The former refers to that aspect of bodl11otta defined 
above, whereas the latter refers to the mind of enlightenment i.e. the discriminative 
awareness d1redly realising emptiness, whKh IS induced by the above altrUIStiC GLO~~:\RY OF KEY TERMS 449 
aspiration. The cultivation of an altruistic intention (sems-bskyed, Skt. cittotpada) 
is included among the preliminary practices (sngon-'gro), in which context it is said 
to he an antidote for envy or self-centred ambition. In the tantras, however, the 
term bodhicitta (byang-sems) specifically refers to the white/male and red/female 
generative essences of the body. 
Bodhisattva byung-chub sems-dpa' 
A spiritual trainee dedicated to the cultivation and fulfilment of the altruistic inten­
tion to attain enlightenment, who is gradually traversing the five bodhisattva paths 
(pa1icamJrga) and ten bodlnsattt•a levels (dasubhftmi). An essential element of this 
commitment to work for others is the determination purposely to remain within 
cyclil: existence instead of simply seeking freedom from suffering for oneself. Philo­
sophic.llly, the bodhisuttua is said to have fully realised the two aspects of 
selflessness, with respect to dissonant mental states and the nature of all phenomena. 
Bodhisattva Vows byung-dmb sems-dpa 'i sdom-pa, Skt. bodhisattuasa'?zvara 
Sec Vows. 
Bon 
An ancient spiritual tradition, considered by some scholars to be of Zoroastrian 
or Kashmiri Buddhist origin, which was widespread in Tibet, particularly in the 
far-western region of Zhangzhzmg prior to the official introduction and establish­
ment of Buddhism. Although its literature clearly distinguishes it from both the 
indigenous shamanism or animism of Tiber and the Buddhist traditions, it has over 
the last several hundred years asstmilated many of the Buddhist teachings and 
developed a nco-Buddhist theoretical foundation. The Bon tradition is particularly 
strong in the Shang valley of Western Tibet, in Kongpo, Khyungpo and the Ngawa 
region of Amdo. 
Bone relics gdunglring-sre/ 
Wirhin the tradition of the Great Perfection (rdzogs-pa chen-po), four kinds of relics 
are said to be left behind following the death of an accomplished master. These are: 
relics of the Buddha-body of Reality (chos-sku 'i ring-srel), relics in the form of 
maJor and minor bone remams (sku-gdung ring-src/), relics in the form of clothing 
(sku-hal rmg-sre/), and relics of miniature size (nyzmg-ngu lta-bu'i ring-src/). Among 
these, the major bone relics (gdung) and minor bone relics (ring-sre/) are retrieved 
from the funeral pyre. Biographical literature suggests that the veneration of such 
relics has been continuously observed within Buddhism from the time of Sakyamu11i 
Buddha, whose own bone relics were interred within eight stupas. Five kinds of 
major bone relic arc specifically enumerated. See Chapter 14. 
Brahman Class brum-::.e'i ngs, Skt. brahma~z.zvar~za 
The priestly class, among the four traditional classes of Hindu society. 
Buddha sangs-rgyas 
The Sanskrit term buddha literally means 'awakened', 'developed', and 'enlight­
ened'. The Tibetan equivalent sangs-rg)'aS is a combination of sangs-pa ('awakened' 
or 'purified'), and rg)'as-pa ('developed'). These two words in this context denote a 
full awakening from fundamental ignorance (avidya) in the form of the two obscura­
tions (duayaz·araiJ..l) and a full realisation of true knowledge, i.e. the pristine cog­
nition ( piJna) of buddha-mind. A fully awakened being is therefore one who, as a 
result of training the mind through the bodhisattva paths, has finally realised his/ 450 G L 0 S SA R Y 0 F KEY T E R .\IS 
her full potential fur wmplete enlightenment (boJhi), anJ has elitmnatcd all the 
obscurations to true knowledge and liberation. Buddhas are characterised according 
to thm five fruitional aspects of buddha-body (kJya), buddha-speech (uJk), buddha­
mind (cztta), buddha-attributes (gw_za), and buddha-activities (k~ty.Jkriy,i), which 
arc poetically descrihed in some Tihetan literature as the 'five wheels of mcxh<tustible 
adornment' (mi-zaJ-pa'i rgyu11-gyi 'khor-lu l11gu). 
Buddha-activities phri11-las, Skt. k~tyaknyJ 
In general, it is said that the principal activity of the buddhas is to bring ;tbout the 
welfare of all sentient beings, an aim whtch initially mot;vateJ thetr aspiration to 
attam the fully enlightened state. The Perfection of Di~criminative Awareness texts 
enumerate eighty mexhaustihle buddha-activities, whde some commentan.tl trc.H­
ises memion twemy-one cnltghtcned <Ktmties of the budJhas. With respect to the 
historical Buddha SJkyamuni, the Buddhtst texts list twelve princip.tl deeds that 
exemplify his enlightened activities. These are in successton: 1) the descent from the 
celestial realm of ·ru~ita, 2) the entry into the ...,-omb, 3) birth, 4) displaying mastery 
in worldly arts and skills, 5) enjoying the women of the harem, 6) renounung the 
worldly way of life, 7) undergmng severe physical penances, X) mcJ1t<ttlllg under 
the tree of enlightenment, 9) overcoming beguiling and male~·olcnt forces, 1 o) 
attaining manifestly perfect buddhahood, 1 1) turning the wheel of the sacred teach­
ings, and 12) entering the peaceful state of final nin'ti'Ja. In tenm of skilful means, 
buddha-activity may be f01.:used through four modalities: pauficatwn, enrichment, 
subrugation, and wr;tthful transform.ttion. See Four Aspects of Enlightened Activity. 
Finally, according to the ltteraturc of the Nyingma school, there is an enumeranon 
of five modes of buddha-activity when spontaneous or effonkss activity is included 
along w1th these modalities. 
Buddha-attributes yon-tan, Skt. gw_z,1 
The attributes of a buddha may be suh~tuneJ as specific qu.tllt1es of buddha-body, 
speech and mind. The attributes of buddha-body arc those associated with the 
various 'dimensions' of buddha-body, described below, and more specifictlly with 
the thirty-two major and eighty minor marks. Those of buddha-speech are known 
as the 'sixty melodies of Hrahmd', which implies that buddha-speech is soothing, 
gentle, firm, audible from a great distance, and so forth. The attrihutcs of buddha­
mind are threefold: compassion, omniscience, and power. Furthermore, in the 
literature of the ta11tras, a classification of five resultant enli~htened attributes is 
given, namely: the pure buddha field, the dimensionless celestial palace, the r .1d1am 
and pure rays of li~ht, the cx.1lteJ thrones of the deities, anJ the posse)>sion of 
consummate resources. 
Buddha-body sku, Skt. kJya 
The term 'buddha-body' refers not only to the physical body of a buddha, but also 
to the varying 'dimensions' 111 which the embmliment of fully enl1~htened .1ttrihutes 
is present. As such, the buddha-body can be categorised in d1fferent ways, corre­
sponding to the different levels of the tcadung. for example, stltras of the Lc~er 
Vehicle (hinuyJnu) speak of the Buddha-body of Reality (dlhm1zLik.1ya) and the 
Buddha-body of Form (nipakJya), while stUras of the Greater Vehicle (m.;h,iy:m,r) 
~enerally mention three buddha-bod1es (tnkJ·ya), dividm¥, the latter into the 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource (s,mzhhogakJya) and the Buddha-body of Ema­
nation (llrrm,il_rukJy,l). Sec below. In the sutras and treatises expound1ng buddha-G I. 0 S SA R Y 0 F KEY T E R .\IS 451 
nature (t.;thagatugarbha), such as Maitreya's Supreme Ccmtmuum of the Gre.lfer 
Vehicle (Mahay.mottaratantrasastra), an enumeration of four buddha-bodies 
(ct.ltztl?kayu) is mentioned. Here, rhe Buddha-body of Essentiality (svubhavikukaya) 
is added to the above three buddha-bodies, ro indicate either an active/passive 
distinction in the Buddha-body of Reality, or rhc underlying indivisible essence of 
the three buddha-bodies. In the tantras of the Nyingma school, there is an enumer­
ation of five buddha-bodies (pmicakaya) where the Buddha-body of Awakening 
(uhhisambodhikaya, Tib. nmgon-byang-gi sku) refers to the apparitional modes of 
the three buddha-bodies, and the Buddha-body of Indestructible Reality (LJajrakJya, 
Tib. rJo-rje'i sku) refers ro their indivisible essence. Finally, in Atiyoga, when the 
buddha-bodies are acrualised, the Buddha-body of Reality is known as the yourhful 
va~e body (g::.hon-mt'i 'bum-pa'i sku) and rhc Buddha-body of Form is known as 
the body of great transformation ( 'pho-ba chen-po'i sku). 
Buddha-body of Emanation SfJrul-sku, Skt. nirmd1fukay.; 
The Buddha-body of Emanation is the visible and usually physical manifestation 
of fully enlightened beings which arises spontaneously from the expanse of the 
Buddha-body of Reality, whenever appropriate, in accordance with the diverse 
dispositions of sentient beings. The sutras refer to three types of emanational body 
in relation to Sakyamuni Buddha: (i) emanational birth in Tu~ita, (ii) emanational 
art forms, and (iii) supreme emanation as one of the thousand buddhas of the 
auspicious aeon. From the disrincti\•c Nyingma perspective, however, the three 
types of emanational body comprise: 1) natural emanations (rang-bzhi11 sprul-sku), 
which arc rhe buddhas of the five enlightened families such as Vairocana in the 
forms they assume when appearing before bodhisattvas of the highest level; 2) 
supreme emanations (mchog-r,i sprul-sku) such as Sakyamuni Buddha and the or her 
budd has of this aeon who initiate a new reaching, and 3) diversified emanations 
(sna-tshogs sprul-sku), including oases, food, medicine and other such material 
manifestations, which are of benefit to living beings, as well as emanational art 
forms (b::.o-bo sprul-sku) and emanational births (skye-bu sprul-sku), such as those 
taken by Sakyamuni in previous lives, for example as Prince Satsverakcru in the 
god realm of Tu~ita. 
Buddha-body of Form gzugs-sku, Skt. nipukayu 
According to the literature of the Lesser Vehicle (hinuyanu) the Buddha-body of 
Form refers to the thousand buddhas of the auspicious aeon, including Sakyamu11i. 
In the Greater Vehicle, however, the term indudcs both the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource and the Buddha-body of Emanation. According to Atiyug..z, when the 
Buddha-body of Form is acrualiscd through the practices of All-surpassing Realis­
ation, a rainbow-light body is attained, and this realisation is known as the Buddha­
body of Great Transformation ('pho-ba chen-po'i sku). 
Buddha-body of Perfect Resource longs-spyod rdzogs-pa'i sku, Skt. 
sambhogakaya 
The Buddha-body of Perfect Resource refers to the luminous, immaterial, and 
unimpeded reflection-like forms of the pure energy of enlightened mind, exemplified 
111 the case of our text by the assembly of the forty-two peaceful deities and the 
tifry-eighr wrathful deities (see Appendix Two), which become spontaneously pre­
sent (/hun-grub) and naturally manifest (rung-snang) at very high levels of realis­
ation, that is to say at the point at which the duality between subject and object GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
dissolves. The interml!diate state of reality (chos-nyid bar-dn) is considered to be an 
optimum rime for the realisation of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. 
Buddha-body of Reality chos-sku, Skr. dharmakaya 
The Buddha-body of Reality is the ultimate nature or essence of the enlightened 
mind, which is uncreated (skyc-med), free from the limits of conceptual elaboration 
(spros-pa'i mtha'-brul), empty of inherent existence (rang-b-..hin-gyis stmzg-p,z), 
naturally radiant, beyond duahry and spacious like the sky. The intermediate state 
of the time of death ( 'chi-kha'i bar-Jo) is considered to be an optimum time for the 
realisation of the Buddha-body of Rea lay. 
Buddha Family de-bzhin gshegs-pa'i rigs, Skt. tathag.;takula 
One of the five enlightened families (pafzcakula) into which rhe meditational deities 
of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource are subdivided. The deities of the Buddha 
family mclude the peaceful aspects Vairocana and Dharvisvari and the correspond­
ing wrathful aspects Buddha Heruka and Buddhakrodhe5vari. See Appendix Two. 
Buddha Field zhings-khams, Skr. flmddhajk~etra 
The operational fields or 'paradises' presided over by specific buddhas, which 
spontaneously arise as a result of their altruistic aspirations, arc known as buddha 
fields. Such environments arc totally free from suffering, both physical and mental, 
and they transcend the mundane god realms (devaloka) inhabited by sentient beings 
of the world-systems of desire, form, and formlessness. It is said that when sentient 
beings who have not yet been permanently released from the bondage of cyclic 
existence have an affinity with a specific buddha and are consequently born into a 
respective pure realm, they become temporarily free nor only from manifest suffer­
ings of the body and mind but also from the pervasive sufferings of past condition­
ing. Such fields or pure realms are regarded as conducive to the continuing 
cultivation of the path to buddhahood. 
Buddhahood sangs-rgyas nyid I s,;ngs-rgyas-kyi go-phang, Skt. buddhatual 
buddhupada 
The attainment of a buddha, who has not only gained total freedom from karmically 
conditioned existence and overcome all the tendencies imprinted on the mind as a 
result of a long association with dissonant mental states, but also fully realised or 
manifested all aspects of buddha-body, buddha-speech, buddha-mind, buddha­
attributes and buddha-activities. 
Buddha-mind thugs, Skt. citta 
The term buddha-mind is synonymous with pristine cognition (i,-zdna), five modes 
of which are differentiated. See Pristine Cognition. In the particular literature of the 
Nyingma school, these five modes are distinctively known as manifest enlightenment 
(mngmz-bymzg-gi thugs), indivtsible indestructible reality (mi-phyeJ rdr~-rJe'i thugs), 
great sameness (nmyam-pa chen-po ·, thugs), great non-discursiveness (mi-rtog 
chen-po'i thugs), and liberator of sentient beings ( 'gro-ba'i sgrol-ba'i thugs). 
Buddha Nature rigs, Skt. gotra 
The seed of enlightenment inherent within the mental continuum of all sentient 
beings. It is this potential which makes it possible for every individual to re<1lise the 
ultimate nature, given the application of appropriate methods. The notion of buddha 
nature is intimately linked with the Buddhist concept of the essential nature of 
mind, which according to Buddhism is considered to be pure, knowing and lumi-G L 0 S SA R Y 0 F KEY T E R ,\IS 453 
no us. Dissonant mental states su~.:h as attachment, aversion and jealousy, which 
perpetuJlly aft1ict our mind and gt\'e rise to suffering, are not the essential elements 
of our mind bur adventitious and conditioned tendencies. ~lorcover, these dtssonant 
states are all rooted in an ignorant state of mind which misapprehends the true 
nature of reality. Hence, through gaining genuine insights into the true nature of 
reality, misconceptions can be dispelled, thus ~o:utting the root of all our di~sonant 
mental states and allowing the buddha-n.nurc within to manifest. The term 'nucleus 
of the tathagata' (t..Jthiig.Jt,Jgurbhu) is a synonym for this essence of buddhahood. 
Buddha-speech gswzg. Skt. u..ik 
The speech of the buddhas is, according to Nyingma literature, said to have five 
;tspccts in that the buddhas may commumcatc through 1) uncreated meaning (skye­
nzed Jmz-gi gsung), 2) enlightened intention and symbols (dgongs-p..J brd..1'i gswzg), 
3) expressive words (br,od-pa tshig-gi gszmg), 4) indivisible reality (dbyer-med 
rdo-r1e'z gszmg), and 5) the blessings of awareness (ng-pa bym-I.Jbs-kyi gswzg). Sec 
Buddha Attributes and Mantra. 
Burnt Offerings sbyin-sre!!.. Skt. homa 
A tantric ritual in whid1 m.my substances, such as wheat, sesame seeds, and mustard, 
etc., arc burnt as offerings in a fire lit on a spcctfically designed hearth. There arc 
different types of burnt-offering rituals corresponding to the enactment of the four 
rites related to the four aspects of enlightened activity: pacification, enrichment, 
subJugation and wrath. 
Calm Abiding zhi-gnas, Skt. sam,zthu 
Calm abiding is a meditJtive tc~o:hnique common to the entire Buddhist tradition, 
characterised by a stabilis,Hion of attention on an internal obJeCt of observation 
conJoined wtth the calming of external distractions to the mind. Calm abiding is an 
essential basis for trammg one's mind in the generation of penetrative insight 
(t'tfJ.Jsyana), a true analyticJl in~tghr into the more profound aspects of a chosen 
obJeCt, such as irs emptiness or ulttnute nature. 
Camaradvipa rnga-y,zb glmg 
The ~ulKonttnent CJnur.JdL·ifJu ts parricul..Hly assooatcJ, in Nyi11gma literature, 
with the Copper-coloured Mountain of Padmasambhava. Sec Four Continents and 
Eight Subcontinents. 
Caryatantra spyod-pa ·; rgyud 
Sec Ubhayatantra. 
Causal Vehicles rgyu mtshan-11yid-kyi theg-pa 
Sec Vehicle. 
Cause and Effect rgyu-'bras, Skr. hetuphala 
In the context of Buddhist philosophy the term refers to the natural law that exists 
between a cause and its effect. Some of the principal features of the law arc: 1) 
nothing evolves uncaused; 2) any entity which itself lacks a process of change cannot 
cause any other event; and 3) only causes which possess natures that accord with 
specific effects can lead to those effects. The term 'cause and effect' is often used to 
translate the Sanskrit worJ kanua, which literally means 'action'. See Past Actions. 
Celestial Palace gzha/-yas-khang, Skt. vimJna 
Sec Ma!)~ala. 454 
Central Channel rtsa dlm-ma, Skt. avadhzui 
See Energy Channels. 
Chang-bu Offerings ch • .mg-lm, Skt. pi~zLja GLOSSARY OF KEY TER~iS 
finger-pressed strands of dough, which are made as offerings to assuage anguished 
spirits and to appease negative forces. 
Channel Branch rtsu-'d.1h 
According to the tatrtras and related medical traditions, there are five energy centres 
located along the central channel of the body at the focal points of the crov .. ·n, 
throat, heart, navel and genitalia. A specific number of channel branches (rtsa-'d.zb) 
emerges from each of these energy centres, and these in turn conduct vital energy 
throughout the body through a network of 7 2,ooo minor channels. See Energy 
Channels. 
Channel of Pristine Cognition )'e-shcs-kyi dhztti 
According to the tantras, the channel of pristine cognition is a synonym for the 
central channel ot the body. See Vital Energy. 
Chiliocosm stong dmzg-po 'Jzg-rten-gyi khams, Skt. suhasralokadhatu 
According to traditional Indian Buddhist cosmology, the world of the four conti­
nents surrounding Mount Sumcru when multiplied one thousand times forms a 
chiliocosm of parallel worlds (stmzg dang-po). The chiliocosm when multiplied one 
thousand times forms a larger diclnlwcosm (strmg wzyis-pa), which in turn when 
multiplied one thousand rimes forms an even larger trichiliocosm (stong gsum-pa). 
This evolution of expanding worlds continues to enlarge incrementally until the 
inconceivably V<lSt number of multiple worlds is reached, in which a single supreme 
Buddha-body of Emanation is said to function simultaneously. 
Citipati dur-khrod bdag-po bdag-mo 
The Cztip.zti are a pair of male and female acolytes of Yama, lord of death, who are 
depicted as two skeletons in dancing posture, symbolising the rites of the charnel 
ground. 
Cittamatra sems-tsum-pu 
One of the four major Buddhist philosophical schools of ancient India, also known 
as Vzf1itinat•Jda, and associated in some respects with the YogJcJra tradition. The 
CittumJtr.z (lit. 'mind only') school founded by the fourth-century Indian master 
Asa1ig.z propounds an idealist or phenomenalistic view of the world. Its main tenet 
is that all phenomena are either actual mental events or extensions of the mind and 
the mind is regarded as existing as a substantially real entity. In addition, the school 
propounds that there exists no atomically composed material world external to, or 
independent of, our perceptions. According to the Cittamdtra school consciousness 
itself is considered ro be eightfold, with the ground-of-all consciousness as the 
foundation. Sec Aggregate of Consciousness. 
Cittamatrin sems rts.zm-pa-{Jo 
A follower of the CiNamJtra school. 
Civa1pcivaka sh.z11g-shang 
:\ m~·rhi,.:.JI -:rearure with the head, arms, and torso of a human being, and the wings 
.md leg-; of J bird. The throne of the male buddha Amoghasiddhi assumes the form 
of .1 cit•,mzch·.1k,z btrd. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 455 
Coemergent Delight /han-cig skyes-pa'i dga'-ba, Skt. sahajasukhalsahaja11a11da 
The coemergent delight is one of the four delights (dga '-ha bzln) experienced during 
the perfection stage (sampannakrama) of meditation. See Four Delights. It is said 
that the coemergent delight is also naturally experienced ar the moment of death 
(sec Chapter 8) and at the moment of conception (see Ch~tpter 11 ). 
Coemergent Ignorance /han-cig-skyes-pa 'i ma-rig-pa, Skt. sahajavidyii 
Sec Fundamental Ignorance. 
Coemergcnt Pristine Cognition lhan-skyes )'e-shes, Skt. sahajajfz,zna 
The natural emergence of pristine cognition th<H occurs Juring rhe perfection stage 
of meditation, when viral energy is absorbed within rhc central channel of rhe subtle 
body. 
Commitment dam-tshig, Skt. samaya 
A sacred commitment or pledge taken by a practitioner which is a prerequisite for 
rhe practice of the tantras. The Tibetan 'dam-tshig' literally means 'binding word', 
indicating that rhe person bewmes bound by a solemn oath. Each class of tantra 
has irs own categorisation of basic and ancillary commitments, which complement 
rhe pratimok~a and bodhisattva vows taken by those who uphold rhe vinaya 
and the sutra tradition of the Greater Vehicle respectively. Sec Vows. Samaya may 
entail the observation of specific precepts which are common to a whole clas!> of 
tantra, or individual precepts, which must be observed in relation to a particular 
mcditational deity. W'hen such commitments are broken they mu~t be restored 
through appropriate tantric ritual practices, for their degeneration may cause serious 
hindrances to progress on rhc path. See Chapter 7· 
Commitments of Indestructible Reality rdo-rjc dam-tsh~g, Skr. vajrasamay,z 
A synonym for the commitments in general which arc underr.tken in rhe context of 
the Vehicle of Indestructible Reality ( Vajraydna). 
Commitments Undertaken in Respect of Reality de-kho-na-nyid-kyi dam-tshig 
A synonym for the four commitments specific to the practice of Atiyoga. 
Compassion snyi11g-rje/thugs-rje, Skt. karuf!d 
In Buddhist literature, the term 'compassion' is often used as a synonym for 'great 
compassion' (mah.ikaru~z.i), which refers to a totally unbiased mind that aspires to 
the liberation of all sentient beings from suffering, equally. Compassion is said to 
become 'great' only when, through proper training of the mind, such an altruistic 
aspiration becomes spontaneous and no longer requires any conscious effort for its 
arising. The measure of having realised such a state is that one spontaneously feels 
a sense of intimacy and compassion towards all others, with the same degree of 
commitment and intensity that one feels towards one's most beloved. It is worth 
bearing in mind that in Buddhism, compassion should not be understood in terms 
J)f pity, which may 1mply a feeling of superionty toward the object of compassion. 
Conceptual Elaboration spros-pa, Skt. prapmica 
Conceptual elaboration refers to the presence of discursive or conceptual thought 
processes, the absence of \vhich (Skt. ni~prapafzca, Tib. spros-bral) is characteristic 
of the realisation of emptiness or actual reality. 
Confession of Negativity sdzg-p.z'i gshags-pa, Skt. pdp..Idesand 
A spiritual practi~..:e which involves the disclosure and purification of accumulated GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
negative actions. The successful application of confession must be undertaken within 
the framework of what are known as the four antidotal powers. for an explan,uion 
of thc!>e sec the introductory context to Chapter 7. 
Conqueror rt,')'..Il-bu, Skr. jina 
In Buddhist ltterature, this term is an epithet for a buddha, mdicating the victory 
attained by a buddha over cyclic existence (S.JI~tsJr.J). In particular in the context of 
this hook, the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource in the ma~ufala of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities is described as represented hy the 'five enlightened families of the 
conquerors' (rgyal-ba rigs-l11ga), where the five male buddhas, in both peaceful and 
wrathful forms, arc known as the five conquerors. Vajradhara, an aspect of the 
primordial buddha Samantabhadra, who represents the Buddha-body of Reality, 
is also known as the 'sixth conqueror' (rgyal-ba drug-pu) or 'lord of the sixth 
enlightened family'. More generally, in its Tibetan form, this same epithet is fre­
quently used as an honorific title before the nall)es of highly venerated beings, e.g. 
Gyalu•.J Yizhin Nurhu (for HI-I the Dalai Lama), or Gyalwa Karmapa. 
Consciousness rnam-pur shes-pa, Skt. uijlldwl 
In Buddhism, comciousness is defined as 'an awareness which is knowing and 
luminious'. It is not physical and thus lacks any resistance to obstruction. It has 
neither shape nor colour; it can be experienced but not externally perceived as an 
objecc. In short, it indudes both the conscious cognitive events and the subconscious 
aspects of the mind through which we know and perceive the world, as well as the 
emotions. A distinction is made between the mundane consciousness (uitii,/11.1) of 
sentient beings, and the pristine cognition (jnJna) of the buddhas. See Pristine 
Cognition and Aggregate of Consciousness. 
Consciousness Transference 'p!Ju-b.J, Skt. sa1~zkrJ11ti 
A unique tantric practice undertaken to transfer the consciousness at the time of 
de.tth, ideally to the unconditiOned state of the re<tlisation of the Buddha-body of 
Reality, or to a realm of existence with a favourable migration, ide.tlly the pure 
realm of a meditational deity. See Chapter 10. 
Continuum of the Ground gzhi'i '1-.')'tuf, Skt. Jsrayat.mtra 
The continuum of the ground is identified with the primordially present intrinsic 
awareness, and the actual reality or emptiness, which is in harmony with the 
fruitiunal aspects of buddhahood. Accordmg to the tantras, the continuum of the 
ground (gzhi'i rgyud) is the basis through which the continuum of the path (lam-gyi 
rgyud) fully manifests as the continuum of the result ( 'hras-bu ·; rgyud). 
Continuum of the Path lam-gyi rgyud, Skt. margatantra 
According to the ta11tras, the continuum of the path is the means through which 
the continuum of the ground (gzhi'i rgyuJ) becomes fully mamiest as the continuum 
of the result ( 'bras-bu ·; rgyud). 
Continuum of the Result 'bras-bu ·; rgyuJ, Skt. phalatantra 
According to the tantras, the continuum of the result is the fruition or conclosion 
attained when the continuum of the ground (gzhi'i rgyud) becomes fully manifest. 
through the continuum of the path (lam-gyi rgyud). G I. 0 S S A R Y 0 r K E Y T E R :\1 S 457 
Copper-coloured .Mountain ::angs-mdog Jp.ll-ri, Skt. Tamrasriparuata 
A sacred abode located on rhe sub(ontincnt Camaradvipa (rnga-yab gling), where 
Padmasambhava is said to (LJrrenrly restde in an awesome rainbow·ltght form. 
Core-penetrating ~ung-th,;/ 
Sec Ascending and Core-penetrating. 
Cutting through Resistance khregs-chod 
A(.:ording to the pith or esoteri( instrudions (m,;n-ng,;g-gt sde) of the Great Perfec­
tion (Ati)•oga) there are two medir.uive techniques, which arc en~agcd in suo.:ess­
ivcly. The first, Curting through Resistance (khregs-chod) focuses on the recognition 
of primordial purity (ka-dug), the nature of awareness (ng-pa), through which 
rhe Buddha-body of Reality is attatncd. The second, All-surpassing Realisation 
(thod-rga/), focuses on the recognition of spontaneous presence (lhun-?.ntb), 
eliciting and recognising the radiances of pristine cognition and the purity of our 
psycho-physical aggregates and clements, rhrough which the rainbow-like Buddha­
body of Form is attained. In All-surpassing Realisation practice, once a stablt: 
rc.1lisation of the nature of aw<treness has been art<tined through Curting through 
Rcsist<tnce, all phenomenal appearances arc liberated through <1 spontaneous realis­
ation of their essential modality .1s inner radiance. Curting through Resistance is 
the subject matter of Chapter 4 of the present work. The introduction to the 
intermediate state of reality, in C:h3pter 1 1 of our text, is illustrative of the esoteric 
instructions on All-surpassing Realisation, whiCh is the pinnacle of meditative prac­
tice ac(ording to the Nyingma school. 
Cyclic Existence 'khor-ba, Skt. sa1~tsJr.J 
A state of existence condtttoned by dissonant mental states and the imprint of past 
actions (karmu), charadcrised by suffering in a cycle of ltfc, death and rebirth, in 
whteh the six classes of sentient beings (~<lL.Jgati; Tib. 'gro-ha rigs-drug) rotate. 
Cyclic existence emerges from fundamental ignorance (al'idya) through a process 
known as the tweh·e links of dependent origination (dt1Jdast.itiga-pratitya­
samutfJt.ida). When fundamental ignorance, identified as the misapprehension of the 
nature of actual reality (dharm.JtJ), is rcversrd, cyclic existence is itself reversed, 
and the contrasting state of nin'ii'Ja is attained, free from suffering and tht: processes 
of rebirth. Sec Dependent Origination and ;-..;irv<l'!a. 
l)akini mkha ·-'gro-ma 
qJkmi arc female }'Ogini who have attained either mundane or supramundane 
sptrttual accomplishments (stddln), the latter referring to the realisations of buddha­
hood. They may be hum.1n beings who have achieved such attainments, or manifes­
tattons of the enlightened acttvity of meditational deities. The Tibetan equivalent 
~mkha'-'gro literally means 'space voyager', space metaphorically implying cmpti­
-ness, and voyager indicattng someone immersed in its experience. The cft.ikini arc 
said to confer enlightened or buddha-activities on the meditator, in contrast to the 
spiritual teacher who confers blessings and the mcditational deity who confers 
accomplishments. 
J?akini of Pristine Cognition ye-shes mkha'-'gro, Skt. jtiJn,lcjJkini 
The female consorts of the pnncip<ll awareness holders of maturation, power over 
the lifespan, the Great Seal and spontaneous presence. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
I?akini of the Three Abodes g11as-gsum mkha'-'gro 
The tjJkmi of the three abodes are those of buddha-body, speech and mind. 
Dalai Lama rgyal bu yid-bzhi11 1zor-lmlri11-po-chc 
The temporal and sp1ritual leader of Tibet. The Da/,;i Lama's temporal reign beg.m 
at the time of the fifth Dalai Lama in the 17th century. Since then the country has 
heen ruled, periodically, by a succession of Dalai Lam,;s, until China's occupation 
in the J ')50s. The Da/,zi Lamas are chosen according to a strict traditional procedure 
of observation and examination initiated following the death of the previous Da/,;i 
Lamu. The present D,z/ai Lama is the fourteenth in the succession of this lineage. 
The title 0,1/ui Lama was originally offered to Sonam Gyatso, the third Da/,zi Lmza, 
by the then ~Iongo) prince Alta11 Qan. The Mongol word da-lui (Tib. rgyu-mtsho) 
means 'ocean (of wisdom)'. 
Qamaru cjd-ma-ru 
A hand-held douhlc-sided drum, frequently identified with the wrathful deities and 
the qakini, and generally utilised as a ritual instrument in conjunction with the bell. 
The c.J.lmaru is said to proclaim 'the sound of great bliss'. 
Dedication of Merit bsngo-bu, Skt. pumllimu 
An important element of Buddhist pr;~ctice enacted normally in the form of a 
recitation of verses of dedication at the conclusion of a spiritual practice. In all 
Buddhist practices, the establishment of the correct motivation at the beginning and 
the altruistic dedication at the end arc regarded as highly significant. The most 
popular obJects of the dedication <1re the flourishing of the sacred teachings of 
Buddhism throughout the universe and the arrainment of full enlightenment by all 
sentiem beings. 
Definitive Meaning nges-do11, Skt. IZitdrth,; 
The sutru teachings of the budd has are classified as being of either definitive meaning 
or provisional meaning (neydrtha) depending on whether they do not or do require 
further interpretation. In general, sutras of provisional meaning concern the nature 
of cyclic existence (sa'?zsdra) and its antidotes, as expounded by Siikyamutri Buddha 
in the first turning of the wheel of the sacred teachings. By contrast, those sutras of 
definitive meaning concern either the nature of emptiness, as expressed in the second 
turnin~ of the wheel of the sacred teachings, or the explications on buddha nature 
and buddha-attributes, as expressed in the third turning of the wheel of the sacred 
teachings. There arc divergent views in the various schools of Tibetan Buddhism .1s 
to which of the sutras of the second and third turnings should be regarded as 
definitive or provisional. 
Dc~cnerate Age snyigs-ma'i dus, Skr. k,z/iyuga 
According to the prevatlmg view of Indian cosmology, a period of cosmic or cydical 
time (aeon, Skr. kai{J.J) comprises fourteen secondary cycles (Skt. mant'antara), each 
of wh~eh la~ts 30ll,720,ooo years. Each secondary cycle is said to contain seventy­
one 'great ages' (Skt. IIZLlhdyuga), and each of these is further subdivided in1<''l four 
ages (Skt. caturyugu) whi~h arc of decreasing duration, and known respectively~ 
the Perfect Age (k~tayuga), the Third Age (tretdyuga), the Second Age (duJp,;ra­
yug,l), and the Black or Dq~enerate Age (kaliyuga). Since these four ages represent 
a gr.1dual decline in meritorious activities, special meditative practices and spiritual 
antidote~ .ne associated with each in turn. Specifically, the Per(ect Age is most suited GLOS'>ARY OF KEY TER:'\IS 459 
to the practice of the Kriyatu1rtra; the Third Age to that of the Caryiita1rtra; the 
Second Age to th,n of the Yogatautra; and the present Black or Degenerate Age to 
that of the Unsurpa~sed Yog,lta1ltra. 
Deity yi-dam, Skt. i~~.Jdcuat,i 
See under Meditational Deity. 
Delusion gti-rnug, Skt. moha 
One of the three poisons (Jug-gsum) along with aversion and attachment, or five 
poisons (dug-lnga) along with aversion, attachment, pride, and envy, which perpetu­
ate the sufferings oi cyclic existence. Delusion is the obfuscating mental factor which 
obstructs an individual from generating knowledge or insight, and it is said to be 
charactenstic of the animal world in general. 
Dense Array gtug-po bkod-p.;, Skt. Ghanauyzlha 
The Dense Array is a synonym for the central buddha field of Akani~!ha. See under 
AbniHha. 
Dependent Origination rtm-"brei, Skt. pr.ltityasamutpada 
The doctrine of dependent origination can be said to be the most fundamental 
met<tphysical view of Buddhist thought and it is intimately linked with the Buddhist 
notion of causation. The principle of dcpendem origination asserts that nmhing 
exists independently of other factors, the reason for this being that things and events 
come into existence only by dependence on the aggreg<Hion of multiple causes and 
conditions. In gcncr<li, the processes of cyclic existence, through which the external 
world and the sentient beings within it revolve in a continuous cycle of suffering, 
propelled by the propensities of past actions and their mteraction with dissonant 
mental states, arc said to originate dependent on twelve successive links, which are 
known as the twelve links of dependent origination (du.zdasti1iga-pratitya­
;;,mzutf"JJ,z). These compnse: I) fundamental ignorance, .z.) motivational tendencies, 
J) comciousness, 4) name and form, 5) sensory activity fields, 6) contact, 7) sen­
sation, 8) attachment, 9) grasping, ro) rebirth process, 1 I) birth, I .z.) ageing and 
death. Although, in the ultimate sense there is no beginning to the continuum of 
mind, a relative beginning can be spoken of on the basis of a single instance of 
rebirth within cyclic existence. Every instance of birth in cyclic existence must have 
a cause and such causes arc ultimately rooted in our fundamental ignorance, which 
misapprehends the: true nature of actual reality. for an ordinary sentient being all 
the twelve links are interconnected and each component of the chain contributes to 
the perpetuation of the cycle. It is only through deliberate reversal of fundamental 
ignorance that one can succeed in bringing the whole cycle to an end. Fundamental 
ignorance (at·idyti) giVC:s rise ro conditioning or tendencies (sat~lsktira) which are 
stored in the substr~num or ground-of-all consciousness (tilay.wijnJna). Following 
the moment of a sentient being's conception, this inheritance of past actions from a 
previous life gives rise to name and form (mimanlpa), i.e. to the five psycho-physical 
aggregates (p.;fic,zskandha), which arc products of that dualising consciousness. 
Then, the sensory activity fields (ayat.Jna) provide the subjective and objective 
framework for sensory activity in its initial stages of development; while contact 
(sparsa) refers to the maturation of sensory perception as an unborn child develops 
a sensitivity to its environment inside the womb. Thereafter, sensation (t1edana), 
attachment (t~·~l.l.l), grasping (JdJna), rebirth process (!Jh.;va), and actual birth (jtiti) GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
together indicate the emergence of a sentient being within the living world; and 
these in turn lead inevnably to old age and death (jardmar,u.la). 
Desire 'dod-chags, Skt. raga 
Sec Attachment. 
Desire Realm, Skt. kiimadhJtu 
See Three World-systems. 
Dhanakosa dha-na-ko-sa 
The name of an island lake situated in the country of 04tJiyaua, generally identified 
in the Tibetan tradition with the Swat Valley of modern Pakistan, where many of 
the Buddhist tantras were once disseminated and practised. It is considered to have 
been the birthplace of both l'rahevajra, the first human lineage holder of Atiyoga, 
and of Padmasambhava. 
Dharmaraja chos-rgya/ 
See under Yama Dharmaraja. 
Discriminative Awareness shes-rah, Skt. prajtia 
The Sanskrit term prajfid is formally defined as 'the discriminative awareness of the 
essence, distinctions, particular and general characteristics, and advantages and 
disadvantages of any object within one's own perceptual range, at the conclusion 
of which doubts are removed'. In other words, this is the faculty of intelligence or 
discriminating awareness inherent within the mental continuum of all living crea­
tures which enables them to examine the characteristics of things and events, thus 
making it possible to make judgements and deliberations. The term prajfid has 
commonly been translated into English as 'wisdom', largely following the example 
of Edward Conze, who translated a voluminous series of texts devoted to the 
Perfection of Discriminative Awareness (PraJ1i..ipJramita). According to the abhi­
dhanna of the Lesser Vehicle, pra11id is one of the five mental factors of ascert~lin­
ment which arise during all mental events of a veridical nature. According to the 
Greater Vehicle, the perfection of this faculty of discriminative awareness (praifldfJd­
ranutd) leads a bodhisattva to a total overcoming of all types of doubt and ignorance 
and to the realisation of the emptiness of all things. Here, in conjunction with skilful 
means (updya), the term praj1iopaya refers to the integration of the two princ1pal 
aspects of the path to enlightenment. In this context praj1ia, or true insight into the 
emptiness of all phenomena, is united in perfect union with skilful means. In tantric 
traditions, the union of prui1iopdyu is often depicted iconographically in the union 
of the male and female deities, and in the symbolic hand-implements such as the 
vajra and the bell. 
Dissonant Mental States nyon-numgs, Skt. klesa 
The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by the various psycho­
logical defilements known as the dissonant mental states. The Tibct~ln word nyon­
mongs implies a mental event whose arising causes psychological afflictions within 
the mind, thus destroying its peace and composure. According to abhidluznna 
literature in general, there arc six primary dissonant mental states: fundamental 
ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and afflicted or dissonant views; and 
an enumeration of twenty subsidiary mental states (Skt. upaklesa), which comprise: 
anger, malice, dissimulation, fury, envy, miserliness, dishonesty, deception, arro­
gance, mischief, indecorum, indecency, obfuscation, agitation, distrust, laziness, (;LOSSARY OF KEY TER~IS 
carele~sness, forgetfulne~s. distraction, and inattentiveness. Even more w1de-ranging 
are the 84,000 dissonant mental '>tates tor which the 84,000 aspects of the sacred 
teachings arc said to provide distinctive antidotes. At the root of all these psychologi­
cal aitlictions lies the fundamental ignorance which misapprehends the true nature 
of reality. 
Downfalls ltung-h.1, Skr. JfhJltl 
See T ransgrcssions. 
Dream Yoga rmi-lam 
~lcditative techniljues for utilismg and transforming dream consciousness within 
the context of Unsurpassed Yugatantra practice. These include: meditative tech­
niques tor retaining ;nvarencss Juring the dream state; multiplying and transforming 
the contents of dreams and recognising their actual nature; and the dispelling of 
obstacles which prevent m<lintaining awareness in the dream stare. 
Dualism gnyis-s1r.mg, Skr. llhhay.rhhJs,z 
Any level of perception of duality. Buddhist thought describes various forms of 
dualism, principal amongst these being: r) a dualistic perception of subject and 
object; 2) all appe.uances of inherent existence; 3) all appearances of convention­
alities; and 4) all forms of conceptuality. A genuine direct realisation of emptiness 
is non-dual, in that it is free from all the above forms of dualism. 
Dwgchen rd;:,ogs-chcn, Skt. m.zhJsandhi 
Sec Great Perfection. 
Fight Charnel Grounds dur-khrod hrgy.1d 
The eight charnel grounds .He thl· great cemeteries of aw . .:icnt India, which are 
regarded as insplr<Hional pl;lces for the practice of meditation. These are respectively 
known, in Tibetan tr.mslarion, as Tumdrak (gtum-drag), Tsangt~ing Tnkpa (tshung­
tshing 'khngs-pa), B<lr T rikpa ( 'h.zr 'k!Jrigs-pu), Kengruchen (keng-rus-c,m), Silbu­
tscl (bsil-hu-tsh.JI, Skr. .~ituz·,m,z), .\1unpa Nagpo (mun-pa nag-po), Kili Kilir 
Dradrokpa (ki-ll ki-l1r sgr.J-sgrug-pu), and Haha Godpa (hu-hu rgod-pa). 
Eight Classes of Consciousness m.zm-shes tshogslg1z.1s-hrgyad 
St·c undl·r Aggregate of Consciousness. 
Eight Classes of Spirits sde-brgy,zd 
A dass1hcation of the m.1hgn forces that can be appe;lscd by specific offerings and 
rituals. Diverse enumerations of th~:se malign forces have been made by Nuhchen 
Sangye Yeshe. Accordingly, there is an outer eightfold group (phyi-yi sde hrgy,zd), 
an inner eightfold ~roup (111111g-gi sde brgyad), a secret eightfold group (gsang-ba'i 
sde brgyud), a supreme e1ghttold group (mchog-gi sde hrgyad), an emanational 
eightfold group (sprul-pa'i sJe hrgyad), and a phenomenal eightfold group (snung­
srid sde hrgyad). 
Eight Extremes mtha'-hrgy,zd, Skr. a~[Jnta 
The eight extremes from which intrinsic awareness is free arc those enumerated 
by Nagiirjuna in the Root Stanz.1s of the M,zdhyumaka entitled Discriminative 
Auhzreness (Prajn.inam,l mu/,mz,zdhyumukukdrika, T 3824), namely: cessation GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
( 'gag-fJa), creation or production (skye-ha), nihilism (chad-pa), eternalism (rtag-pa), 
coming ( 'ong-ba), going ( 'gro-ba), diversity (tha-dad-pa), and singularity (gcig-pa). 
Eight Freedoms and Ten Opportunities da/-ba hrgyad dang 'byor-ba bcu 
Birth as a human being with the freedom and opportunity to follow the Buddhist 
path is regarded as difficult to attain and a precious circumstance. In the preliminary 
practices of the tantra path, in order to establish an appreciation for the significance 
of human rebirth, the freedom one has from eight unfavourable rebirths is a focus 
of contemplation, together with contemplation of the ten favourable opportunities. 
The eight freedoms arc the freedoms from the following eight states: birth in the 
hells, birth as an anguished spirit, birth as an animal, birth as an uncivilised or 
barbarous person, birth as a long-living god, birth into a society that holds mistaken 
beliefs, birth in an age devoid of Buddhism, and birth with limited faculties. Among 
the ten favourable opportunities, there arc five which are personally acquired and 
five which are contingent on external factors. The former comprise the favourable 
opportunities of being born as a human being, i"n a civilised society, with perfect 
sense-faculties, not being engaged in a conflicting lifestyle, and having confidence 
in Buddhism. The latter comprise the favourable opportunities of being born in an 
aeon when a buddha has appeared, when the sacred teachings have been taught, 
when they arc still being practised, and when one actively engages in their practice, 
and finds a qualified spiritual friend (k,;/yanamitra). Sec Chapter 1. 
Eight [Great] Fears 'jigs-pa hrgyad, Skr. a~[abhuya 
These arc variously enumerated but often include: drowning, fires, thieves, captivity, 
lions, snakes, elephants, and spirits. 
Eight Great Projectrcsses spur-byed chen-mu brg)•ad 
The eight great projectresscs are female deities representing forces that propel 
various classes of sentient beings to exalted rebirths during the intermediate state 
of reality. Sec Chapter 6. 
Eight Objects [of Consciousness] [m,;m-shes-kyij yu/ brgyad 
These arc the objects of the eight classes of consciousness, i.e. deep-seated habitual 
tendencies (ground-of-all consciousness), dissonant mental states (deluded con­
sciousness), thoughts (mental consciousness), sights (visual consciousness), objects 
of taste (gustatory consciousness), sounds (auditory consciousness), smells (olfac­
tory consciousness) and physical objects (tactile consciousness). See under Aggregate 
of Consciousness. 
Eight Sensory Objects yul brgyad 
Sec Eight Objects of Consciousness. 
Eighteen Hells dmyal-ha bco-brJ.,ry,;d, Skr. a~fadasanaraka 
States of existence within the cycle of rebirth, conditioned by our past actions, 
where the expericm:e of suffering, arising from hatred, anger and fear, is most 
intense and extended. Abhidhanna literature mentions two main types of such 
hell-like existences, characterised by the dominance of either freezing coldness or 
burning hear. These two arc in turn divided into eighteen subcategories. 
Eighty Minor Marks dpe-byad brgyad-cu, Skt. asityanuvyaiijana 
See Major and Minor Marks. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Eighty-four Thousand Aspects of the [Sacred] Teaching chos-sgo brgyad-khri hzhi 
stong 
The Buddha's teachings are said to comprise eighty-four thousand aspects or 
approaches, when they are classified according to their function as an antidote. It 
is said that there are eighty-four thousand dissonant mental states, comprising 
twenty-one thousand aspects respectively of attachment (raga), aversion (dvesa), 
delusion (moha), and their combination; and there is an antidote within the 
Buddha's teachings corresponding to each of these dissonant mental states. 
Elemental forces 'byung-po, Skt. bhota 
A category of forces associated with the elements: earth, water, fire, wind and space, 
which are said to move through the body in a monthly cycle and to whom certain 
illnesses and paediatric disorders arc attributed in Tibetan medicine. These may be 
appeased or brought back into balance by the application of medicinal antidotes, 
or by the counteracting rituals prescribed in the tantras, as outlined in Chapter 9· 
Elements I Elemental Properties 'hyung ba, Skt. bhuta 
Sec five Elements. 
Eleven Vehicles theg-pa hcu-gcig 
See Vehicle. 
EMA e-ma 
Identical to EMAHO. 
EMAHO e-ma-ho 
An exclamation of great wonder or astonishment. 
Empowerment dhang-bskur, Skt. ahhi~eka 
A ritual ceremony performed by accomplished spiritual teachers and lineage holders 
to empower prospective trainees, prior to their engaging in the various vehicles and 
specific practices of the tantras. The meditative processes of the empowerment ritual 
arc intended to activate the potentials inherent within the body, speech and mind 
of the trainee, in other words to awaken the seed of the natural ability to engage in 
the practice. Such empowerment ceremonies are an essential prerequisite for the 
practice of tantra in the Buddhist tradition. Sec also Four Empowcrments. 
Emptiness stong-pa-nyid, Skt. sunyata 
The ultimate nature of reality. According to the Madhyamaka school it is the total 
absence of inherent existence and self-identity with respect to all phenomena. Its 
synonyms include ultimate truth (Skt. paramdrthasatya), actual reality (Skt. dhar­
mata), and suchness (Skt. tathatJ). Though presented in the scriptures of both the 
Lesser Vehicle and the Greater Vehicle, the theory of emptiness is most systemati­
cally developed in the writings of the second-century Buddhist thinker Nagarjuna, 
the founder of the Madhyamaka school. According to this view, all things and 
events, both external and internal, are devoid of any independent, intrinsic reality 
that constitutes their essence. Nothing can be said to exist independently from the 
complex network of factors that gives rise to their origination, nor are phenomena 
independent of the cognitive processes and conceptual designations (mental con­
structs) that make up the conventional framework within which their identity and 
existence are posited. It is our deeply ingrained tendency to conceive of things as 
materially existing in their own right that conditions and compels us to perceive GLOSSARY OF KEY TER~tS 
and grasp at a substantial reality of things and our own existence. In turn, when all 
levels of wnccptualisation dissolve and when all forms of dichotomising tendencies 
are quelled through deliberate meditative deconstruction of conceptual elaborations, 
Niigiirjuna argues, the ultimate nature of reality -the emptiness -will finally 
become manifest to the person. Although the term is known also in the literature 
of the Lesser Vehicle, it is in the philosophical tenets of the Madhyamaka school that 
the different interpretations of emptiness were greatly elaborated. See Madhyamaka. 
Energy Centre rtsu-'khor, Skt. cakra 
According to the tantras and related medical traditions, there are five energy centres 
within the subtle body. These arc located at the crown, throat, heart, navel and 
genitalia, where the right and left channels are said to loop around the central 
channel (uvadhzlti), forming knots (rtsa-nzdud) which obstruct the flow of subtle 
energy into the central channel. At each of the five energy centres, there are a diverse 
number of channel branches (rtsa-'d,lh), through which vital energy is conducted 
throughout the body. · 
Energy Channels rts.J, Skt. nJc./i 
In the tantras and related medical traditions, it is said that there arc 7 2,ooo vein-like 
channels through which flow the vital energies or subtle winds (r/ung, Skt. vayu) 
that sustain life and which also give rise to various conceptual states within the 
individual's mind. Three main channels run vertically from the crown fontanelle of 
the head down to the genitalia, intersecting at the five energy centres (Skt. cukra) of 
the crown, throat, heart, navel and genitalia. All the minor energy channels branch 
off from these energy centres to permeate the body. Among the three main channels, 
the one to the left is known as the rkyu,zg-ma (Skt. lalanJ), the one to the right as 
the ro-m.J (Skt. rasanJ), and the central channel as the dhu-ma (Skt. avadhzUi). 
Enlightened Family rigs, Skt. gotralkula 
This term may render either the Sanskrit gotra, in which case it is synonrmous with 
buddha nature, or the Sanskrit kula, in which case it refers to the five families (Skt. 
pa,..icakula) into which the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities are grouped. Sec the 
individual entries under Buddha Family, Vajra Family, Ratna Family, Padma Family 
and Karma Family and Appendix Two. 
Enlightened Intention dgrmgs-pa, Skt. ahhiprJya 
In the context of our text, enlightened intention refers to the unimpeded, non­
conceptual and compassionate intention of the buddhas, whether or not it is clearly 
di~cerned by an observer. 
Enlightenment by,mg-chuh, Skt. hodhi 
In the Buddhist context, 'enlightenment' refers to an individual's awakening to the 
mind's <tctual nature. The Tibetan equivalent byang-chub implies the purification 
(hyung) of obscurations and the perb:tion (chub) of omniscience. The process of 
a training enlightenment therefore proceeds in conjunction with the dispelling of the 
dissonant mental states which obscure the perception of actual reality. On the 
bodhisattva path, thirty-seven distinct aspects of enlightenment are sequentially 
~ultivatcd. A fully enlightened being is a buddha who is totally free from all 
obstru~tion to true knowledge and the state of liberation, and is hence omniscient 
111 the knowledge of reality. t;LO~~:\RY OF KEY TER.\'IS 
Enrichment rgy..Js-pu'Jias, Skt. pu~~iknyJ 
See Four Aspects of Enlightened Activity and Buddha-activities. 
Envy phrag-dog, Skt. ir~a 
Envy, which includes all the various forms of self-cherishing ambition, is one of the 
five poisons of the mind (dug-lnga), along with aversion, delusion, pride, and 
attachment. In its extreme manifestation, of persistent hostile competitiveness, it is 
said to characterise the worlds of the antigods (asuraloka). 
Equanimity bt111zg-snyoms, Skt. upek~a 
Equammity is one of the four immeasurable aspirations, along with loving kindness, 
compassion and empathetic joy, which arc cultivated in the preliminary practices 
and commonly repeated before engaging in daily practice. Equanimity is an essential 
element of the cultivation of the altruistic intention to attain enlightenment for the 
benefit of others, in the context of which the practitioner culrivates an unbiased 
attitude towards all sentient beings, regarding them as being completely equal and 
thus overcoming any sense of partiality towards them. Normally one's attitude 
towards other persons, for example, is strongly prejudiced by one's classification of 
others into seemingly incompatible groups of friends, enemies or those regarded 
with indifference. Sec also under Bodhicitta. 
Esoteric Instructional Class nzan-ngag-gi sde, Skt. upadesauarga 
See under Great Perfection. 
Essence, Natural Expression and Compassionate Energy ngo-bo rang-hzhin 
tlm~s-rie 
In the terminology of the Great Perfection, the essence (n~u-bo) is the modality of 
the Buddha-body of Reality, natural expression (rang-b:::hm) is the modality of 
the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, and compassionate energy or spirituality 
(thugs-r1e) is the modality of the Buddha-body of Emanation. These three modalities 
may be cultivated through the techniques known as Cutting through Resistance 
(klnegs-chod) and All-surpassing Realisation (thod-rgal). The term natural 
expression (rang-lnhin) also has another distinctive usage in the context of the 
present work, where it frequently refers to the attributes represented by the twenty­
eight lsuari among the assembly of the fifty-eight wrathful deities. See Natural 
Expression. 
Eternalist mu-stegs-pa, Skt. tirthika 
In general Buddhist u-;age, the term 'etcrnalist' refers to the four so-called etcrnalistic 
s...:hools of ancient India, namely S.lf?zkhy.;, Vaishnavism, Shaivism and Jainism, 
whi...:h posit the existence of an independent self or soul (atmun, Tib. bdag). By 
contrast, Buddhist schools identify the self in terms of the five psycho-physical 
aggregates (p,ziicask,mdha), and therefore do not accept the notion of self in the 
sense of an eternal, unchanging, independently existing entity. Both eternalism and 
nihilism are regarded as the two extreme views, which are to be avoided when 
seeking an insight into emptiness, the true nature of reality, by means of the Middle 
Way (madhyamapr,aipad). Here all apprehensions of inherent existence constitute 
falling into the extreme of eternalism, and a total denial of the laws of cause and 
effect in association with past and future lives constitutes falling into nihilism. 
Expilnsc of [Actual] Reality chos-dbyings, Skt. dharmadhJtu 
The expanse of actual reality is a synonym for the expanse of emptiness. As such, G L 0 S S A R Y 0 I" K E Y T E R ~1 S 
it indil:ates both the dimension of the Buddha-body of Reality, and the pristine 
cognition of reality's expanse (dh.;rm.Jdh,Uujii.:Zna). 
Extremes mtha', Skt. antu 
From the perspective of the Greater Vehicle, the Buddha-body of Reality is s.tid to 
be free from the dualisti~: extremes of ~:reation and cess~uion (skye-'gag), eternalism 
and nihilism (rtag-chad). existeiKe and non-existen~:e (yod-med), and appearaiKe 
and emptiness (s1wng-stong). 
Feast-offering tshugs fkyi 'khor-loj, Skt. gul.z..Jcakra 
The Tibetan word tshogs generally has two senst:s, corresponding to the Sanskrit 
sambhara and ga~zacakra. In the latter case it refers to the feast-offerings whi~:h are 
a unique tantric method for conferring accomplishment and pacifying obsrades. In 
general, feast-offerings are frequently held to commemorate important events in the 
Buddhist calendar, such as the tenth-day feast-offering, dedicated to Padma­
sambhava. The overall purpose is to distribute merit and pristine cognition in the 
context of a specific tantric ritual. See also under Accumulation. 
Final Nirval)a yungs-su mya-ngan-las 'dus, Skt. parinirvd1_za 
The expression 'final nirud1.za' refers spel:ifically to the passing away of buddhas, 
su~:h as Sakyamuni, and it is considered to be the last of the twelve prin~:ipal deeds, 
exemplified by the death of .Sakyamuni at Kusinagara. See also under Nirval)a and 
Buddha activities. 
Five Aggregates phullg-fw lnga, Skt. paflcaskandha 
See the separate entries, under Aggregate of Consciousness, Aggregate of Form, 
Aggregate of Feelings, Aggregate of Perceptions, and Aggregate of Motivational 
Tendencies. 
Five Appendages y.m-lug lngu, Skr. puncJ1iga 
The head and the four limhs. 
Five Approximating Crimes nye-ba'i mtsh.Jms-med lngu, Skt. P.JiicopJnt,zriy.J 
The five crimes which approximate the five inexpiable crimes (mtshams-meJ lng.J) 
in their severity are: to rape a fcm.1le arhat (dgra-bcom-ma-l.J 'dod-log spyod-pa), 
to kill one who abides on the level of a genuine bodbisattv.J (hyan[!.-sems nges-gnas 
gsod-pa), to kill a trainee monk (sloh-pu 'i dge-'dun gsod-fJ.J), to misappropriate the 
in~:ome of the monastic community (dge-'dun-gyi 'Ju-sgo 'phrog-pu), and to destroy 
a stiipa (mchod-rten bslng-pu). 
Five Buddha-bodies sku lnga, Skr. p,ziicakaya 
The Buddha-body of Reality, Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, Buddha-hody of 
Emanation, Buddha-body of Aw~1kening, and Buddha-body of lnJestru~:tihle 
Reality. See Buddha-body and individual enrries. 
Five Degenerations snyigs-ma l11ga, Skt. pancak.J~aya 
The five degenerations comprise: degeneration of the lifespan (ayul!kasJya), 
degeneration in terms of views (d~~(ika~ay,z), degeneration in terms of d~sonant 
mental states (kleiak,z~Jy,z), degeneration of sentient beings (sattuaka~d)'u), all'ti 
degeneration of the present age (kalpaka~aya). 
Five Elements 'hywzg-ba l11ga I khums /11ga, Skt. paiicabhzual panc.zd/}{itu 
Al:l:ording to the Indo-Tibetan system, as expounded in the tantras, mediGll and GLO~SARY 01' KEY TERMS 
astrologiCal texts, the five elements: earth, water, fire, wind, and space are five basic 
components that make up our environment, our bodies, and, at their subtle levels, 
mod.1litics of the mind. At the subtlest level, the elemental properties exist as the pure 
natures represented by the five female buddhas (Akasadhatvisvari, Buddhalocana, 
AlJmaki, Pa,_ufarav.lsini and S.:mz.Jyutdrd) and these manifest as the physical propcr­
nes of earth (solidity), water (fluidity), fire (heat and light), wind (movement and 
energy). and space -in other words as all the qualities that constitute the physical 
forms that we experience through our senses. A proper understanding of the 
clements and the way in which their properties permeate the nature of mind, the 
body and our environment is fundamental to the practice of Buddhist tantra. See 
Chapters 8 and I I and Appendix Two. 
Five Enlightened Families rzgs lnga, Skt. pa1icakula 
Sec Buddha Family, Vajra Family, Ratna Family, Padma Family, and Karma Family 
and Appendix Two. 
Five Hollow Viscera snod-lnga 
According to the traditions of Tibetan medicine, the five hollow viscera are those 
of the stomach, the large inrestinc, the small intestine, the bladder, the gall bladder, 
and the reservoir of reproductive fluid (bsam-se'u). 
Five Inexpiable Crimes mtshams-med lnga, Skt. panciinantarfya 
The five inexpiable Gimes, which arc regarded as the most severe and consequently 
the most difficult to overcome by reparation, are: matricide (ma gsod-pa), arhatcide 
(Jgra-bcom-{Ja gsod-pa), patricide (pha gsod-pa), creating a schism in the monastic 
community (dge-'dzm-gyi dbyen-byas-ba), and intentionally wounding a buddha 
(Jc-b;:,hm gshegs-po1'i sku-I.Jngan-sems-kyzs khrag 'byin-pa). 
Five Poisons dug-lnga, Skt. {Jmicaklesa 
The five poisons comprise five of the most basic dissonant mental states (k/esa) -
all of which are grounded in fundamental ignorance (avzdya). They are: delusion 
(moh.J), attachment (r.lga), aversion (Jr·e~a), pride (abhzmdna), and envy/self­
cherishing ambition (ir~J). 
Five Precious Substances rin-chen lngo1 
Gold, silver, turquoise, coral and pearl. 
Five Pristine Cognitions ye-shes lnga, Skt. pafzcdj1i.l11a 
Sec under Pristine Cognition. 
Five Sense-faculties/organs dbang-po rnam-lnga, Skt. paiicendriya 
The five sense-faculties or sense-organs comprise: the eyes (cak~urindriya), ears 
(srotrendriya), nose (ghra,_zenJriya), tongue (jihvendriya), and body (kayendriya). 
Five Solid Viscera do11-lnga 
Acwrding to the traditions of Tibetan medicine, the five solid viscera are the heart, 
lungs, liver, kidneys, and spleen. 
Form Realm and Formless Realm 
See Three World-systems. 
Formal Description mngon-rtogs, Skt. abhisamaya 
While practising the generation stage (utpattikrama) of meditation, the deities arc 
visualised in accordance with their formal descriptions which are set down in the GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
texts of the appropriate means for attainment (sgrub-thabs, Skt. sadhana). In other 
contexts the term 'abhisumaya' conveys the sense of 'emergent or clear realisation', 
as in Maitreya's Omument of Emergent Reahsution (Ablns,zmay,zlu'?zkJra). 
Four Aspects of Enlightened Activity las-bzhi, Skt. cutu~kamzun 
These are specific ritual functions based on the dynamic modes of a buddha's 
activity, namely: pacification (santikriya, Tib. zhi-ba'i las), which includes the paci­
fication of obstacles to spiritual practice, illness and the causes of harm to society 
and the environment; enrichment (pu~(ikriya, Tib. rgyas-pa'i las), which includes 
increasing the lifcsp.111 and prosperity; subjugation (uu~llukriya, Tib. dbang-gz Ius), 
which includes the controlling of neg;ltive and hostile forces; and wrath or transfor­
mation (mura1.wkriya, Tib. drag-po 'i las), which includes the elimination of male,·ol­
ent forces. The ritu;tl enactment of these four rites is often undertaken in the context 
of a burnt offering ritual (homa). 
Four Aspects of Ritual Service and Means for Attainment bsnyen-sgrub yan-lag 
bzhi, Skt. caturd1!gaseuJsadhana 
Whenever any means for attainment (Skt. s,zdlhl1ta) is practised, it will comprise the 
'four aspects of ritual service and means for attainment'. The four branches are: 
ritual service (set,a), further ritual service (upaseua), means for attainment (sadhana) 
and great means for attainment (mt~hasadhana), which respectively entail 1) mantra 
recit.Hion and one-pointed visualisation of the meditational deity, 2.) prayers that 
the blessing of the deity will descend to transform mundane body, speech and mind 
into buddha-body, speech and mind, 3) the absorption of accomplishments from the 
actual deity into the visualised deity and thence into oneself, and 4) the realisation of 
primordial purity experienced when body, speech and mind arc identical to those 
of the deity. 
Four Aspects of Sensory Contact reg-b;;hi 
These are sensory contact, along with Its subject, object and actual sensation. 
Four Buddha-bodies sku-hzhi, Skt. cutul?kJya 
See under Buddha-body. 
Four Classes of Qakini mkha ·-'gro sde-bzhi. 
The four classes of tf.akini comprise those born in sacred abodes or pure lands 
(zhing-skyes mkha'-'gro), those born in consequence of mantra recitation (sngugs­
skyes mkha'-'gro), those -...·ho are naturally born (/hmz-skyes mkhu'-'gro), and those 
born of pristine cognition (ye-shes mkha'-'gro). 
Four Continents and Eight Subcontinents gling lnhi-dang gling-phran brgyud 
According to traditional Indian Buddhist cosmology, the world has Mount Sumeru 
as its central axis, surrounded bv seven concentric oceans divided from one another 
by seven successive ranges of go.lden mountains: Yugandhura, l~adhara, Khadinku, 
Sudarsan.z, A~uakanz,z, Vinataku, and .\J.mzindhara. The entire world is gmJed by a 
perimeter of iron mountains known as the CakruvJiu. In each of the four cardmal 
directions of Mount Sumeru, there is located a continent, along with two satellites or 
subcontinents. Among these, the eastern continent Viratdeha {Ius-'phags; 'sublime ir 
body') is semicircular and it has two subcontinents: Deha (/us) and Videlu.. 
(Ius-'phugs). The southern continent}umbudvlpa ( 'dzam-bu glmg; 'rose-apple conti­
nent') is triangular and its two subcontinents are Camaradllipa (mgt~-yuh glmg) 
and Ap.zracJm,zra (mga-yt~h gzhun). The western continent, A.paraguduniya (bu-GLOSSARY Or KEY TEH~IS 
lung spyod; 'rich in .:atrle'), is circular and its two subcontinents are .Sa(hii (gYo-ldan) 
and fAtar,.mzalltri~za (/am-mchog ·~ro). Lastly, the northern continent Uttarukuru 
(sgra-mi-sny.m; 'unpleasant sound') is square and its two sub.:ontinents .ue KuruL'u 
(sgr.J mi-snyan) and K,mruL'u (sgr.J n11-snyan-gyi ;:/a). Among the four, }umbuduipa 
is unique in that it is here that the sacred teachings of the buddhas are said to 
tlourish. See Chapter I 1, Pan Three with respect to instructions for choosing a 
birthplace and Chapter 1 with respect to visualising the ma~ujala of offerings. 
Four Delights dga '-hu hz/JI 
In the perfection stage (sum{Junnakramu) of meditation, when the practiceo.; of sexual 
yoga (sbyor-ba) are applied in order to bring about a coalescence of bliss and 
emptiness, the generative essence (thig-le) of the body descends through the central 
channel and the four delights arc sequentially experienced. As it descends from the 
energy centre of the crown fontanelle to the throat centre, the pristine cognition of 
delight (dga '-bu) is experienced. When it descends from the throat centre to the 
he.ut centre, the pristine cognition of supreme delight (mchog-dg.l') is experienced. 
When it des.:ends from the heart centre to the navel centre the pristine cognition of 
the absence of delight (dgu '-bru[) is experienced. And when it descends from the 
navel centre to the secret centre of the genitalia, the coemergent delight (/hun-skyes 
d~.l'-ba) is experienced. Thereafter, the generative essence is retained within the 
body and drawn upwards through the central channel, permeating each of the 
energy centres of the hody in turn with unce~1sing bliss and non-conceptual pristine 
cognition. Sec also under Coemergent Delight. 
four Elemenrs 'byung-hu bzhi, Skr. caturblnltu 
Earth, water, fire and wind. See Five Elements. 
Four Empowerments db.1ng-bskur bzhi, Skt. caturabiJI~ekha 
The four empowerments of the Unsurpassed Yoga tantras, induding .\1..zbJyog..z, 
are: the vase empowerment (lmm-Jb,mg), which purifies the ordJn<lTY body and its 
energy channels into the Buddha-body of Emanation (nirmd~rak.ly,l); the secret 
empowerment (gs.mg-db.mg), which purifies ordin~1ry speech and its vital energy 
into the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource (sambhogakJya); the empowerment of 
discriminative pristine cognition (shes-rub ye-shes-kyi dbung) which purifies ordi­
nary mind and its seminal point (bindu) into the Buddha-body of Reality (dh.Jr­
mak,iy.J); and the empowerment of word and meaning (tslng-don-gi dbunK), which 
purifies these three equally Jnto the Buddha-body of Essentiality (suubhJuzkakJya). 
Sec also Empowerment. 
Four Extreme Views mu-b::.hi 
In the context of the present work, these are the four extreme views of pernunencc, 
decay, self, and substantialism. 
four Formless Meditative Absorptions g::.ugs-med S1ryums- '1ug b::.hi, Skt. 
catul!sam,1patti 
The four formless meditative absorptions which lead to birth in the world-system 
of formlessness, at the summit of cyclic existence, are those known as: infinite as 
the sky (:ik.lsJnantyJyutuna), infinite consciousness (L•iJ1i.ln.11z.mtyJy.Jtanu), noth­
ing-at-all (uki'!'C•l1l)'Jyutunu ), and neither perception nor non-perception (naiua­
S.J1!ljfzd1l.JSil1!1Jildyutunu ). See Three World-systems. 470 G L 0 S S A R Y 0 F KEY T E R ~~ S 
four Immeasurable Aspirations tsh.zd-med bzhi, Skt. c.ztvary.zpramJ1.zJni 
Immeasurable compassion, love, empatheti( joy and equanimity. The cultivation of 
the four immeasurable wishes, whi(h is normally accompanied by the recitation of 
a short prayer (see Chapter 1 ), is a common preliminary to daily practi(e. This 
(Ontemplation establishes correct motivation and provides a strong impetus to the 
cultivation of the altruistic intention to attain enlightenment for the sake of all 
sentient beings. 
Four Malevolent Forces bdud-bzhz, Skt. c.zturmiira 
See Malevolent/Beguiling Forces. 
Four Modes of Liberation xrol-lugs h::.hi 
The four modes of liber.uion, a(cording to Atiyoga, comprise: primordial liberation 
(ye-gro/), natural liberation (rang-gru/), direct liberation (cer-gro/), and further 
liberation (y.mg-gru/) or liberation from extremes (mtha'-gru/). These are attained 
in connection with the intermediate state of ·meditative concentration (bsam-gt.zn 
bar-do). 
Four l"oble Truths bden-pa hzhi, Skt. c,zturiiryasatya 
The tea(hing on the four noble truths forms the basis of the first promulgation of 
Buddhism, since it is the very first formal discourse given by .Sakyamuni in Samath 
following his attainment of buddhahood at Bodh Gaya. The four truths are: the 
truth of suffering, the truth of its origins, the truth of its cessation, and the truth of 
the path leading to SIKh cess.Hion. The doctrine of four truths lays the foundation 
upon which the entire strudure of the path to buddhahood is built and the under­
standing of these four truths is therefore an indispensable basis for a successful 
practice of the Buddhist path. The tirst two truths constitute one inter-relationship 
of cause and effect and the remaining two, another. Wnhout proper insight into the 
fir~t inter-relationship no genuine aspiration to seck freedom from cyclic existence 
will arise. Similarly, \Vithout insight into the second, no genuine release from the 
bondage of karmically conditioned existence can be achieved. 
Four Preliminaries 
Sec Preliminary Practices. 
Four Times dus-bzhi 
Past, present, future, and indefinite time. In some contexts the four times refer to 
different phases of conceptual thought, in which case they are enumerated as past 
thoughts, present thoughts, future thoughts and indeterminate thoughts (so-sor 
rtog-fJ<l). 
Fundamental Ignorance ma-rig-pa, Skt. Jl'idyJ 
The most fundamentalmisapprehemion of the nature of actual reality, which is the 
source of all dissonant mental states and the twelve links of dependent origination. 
Divergent views exist among Buddhist thlllkers about the specific character and 
nature of fundamental ignorance. For example, the fourth-century master Asmiga 
conceives this ignorance to be a state of unknowing, ignorant of the actual nature 
of reality. In (ontrast, for masters like Nagarjuna and especially Dhannaklrti, it is 
an <Ktivc state of mis-knowing, i.e. it understands the existence of one's own self 
and the world in a fundamentally distorted manner. In the classical Indian Buddhist 
texts, two principal forms of fundamental ignorance arc identified -(i) ignorance 
pert.11nmg to the a(tu<ll nature of reality and (ii) ignorance pertaining to the law of GLOSSARY Of KEY TI:.R.\1S 471 
cause and effect. The Nyingma master Dudiom Rinpoche explains the evolution of 
bewilderment from fundamental ignorance in three phases: first, the fundamental 
ignorance of self-identity (bdag-nyid gcig-pu 'i ma-rig-pa) is not recognised to be 
false; second, the coemergent ignorance (/han-skyes ma-rig-pa) ensures that the 
consciousness of self-identity and non-recognition of actual reality coincide; and, 
third, the fundamental ignorance of the imaginary (kun-btags ma-rig-pa) generates 
bewilderment, through which one's own bewildering perceptions arc externally 
discerned in terms of the subject-object dichotomy, giving rise to all the sufferings 
of cyclic existence. 
Garu9a khyung 
A mythical bird normally depicted with an mvl-like sharp beak, often holding a 
snake, and with large and powerful wings. References to this bird can be also found 
in Hindu literature where it is often mentioned as the flying mount of powerful 
mundane gods (deua). In Buddhism, the symbolism of the g • .mHfa is generally 
associated with pristine cognition (it is said that the garuq.1 can t1y as soon as it is 
hatched) and with the consuming of dissonant mental states (the holding of a snake 
in its he<lk). In a Buddhist context, the garucja is also associated with Vajrapii~ri 
and certain wrathful forms of Padmasambhava through its power to subdue snakes, 
serpentine water spirits, and subterranean creatures, and, according to the Nyingma 
school, the gamqa is sometimes revered as a guardian of treasures (gter-bdag) or 
even as a repository of treasures (gter-kha). 
Gclug dge-lugs 
One of the four main traditions or schools of Tibetan Buddhism. Founded by the 
great fourteenth-century philosopher Tsongklhlpa and his foremost students, it 
quickly estahlished it~elf as a dominant tradition of Tihctan Buddhism with its 
monasteries extending from the far west of Tibet to Chamdo, Dartsedo, and Amdo 
in the cast. following the Third Dalai Lama's visit to .Mongolia, it became the state 
religion in .Mongolia and the Buriat regions of the Soviet Union, and during the 
seventeenth century its hierarchy became the dominant political force in Central 
Tibet when the fifth Dalai Lama assumed both spiritual and temporal power with 
the assistance of Mongol armies. 'Gelug' literally means the tradition of the virtuous 
path and is named after the monastery called Geden or Ganden, founded by 
Tsongkhapa in I 409. 
Generation Stage bskyed-rim, Skt. utpattzkrama 
According to the traditions of the tantras, the main practices of meditation whil:h 
follow the successful conclusion of the preliminary practices (sngmz-'gro) include 
the generation stage and the perfection stage (Skt. s,lmpamzakrama). Both the 
generation and perfection stages of meditation are related ro transforming our 
mundane experiences of each of the phases of life and death, namely: the intermedi­
ate states of the time of death, of reality, of rebirth, and of living. The generation 
stage is characterised by the meditative processes of the practitioner's gradual 
identitication with the form and pristine cognition of the meditational deity and it 
is during this stage that, with the support of mantra recitation, the elaborate 
visualisation of the deity is gradually generated and stabilised. This process, known 
as self-generation, is a simulacrum of bringing the three buddha-bodies on to the 
path and is composed therefore of three principal aspects: dissolution into emptiness 
(Buddha-body of Reality), arising into a subtle form such as a seed-syllable or 472 GLOSSARY OF KEY TER\tS 
symbol (Buddha-body of Perfect Resource), <tnd full emergence into the deity's form 
(Buddha-body of Emanation). Sec the Introductory Commentary by HH the Dalai 
Lama and Perfection Stage. 
Generative Essences by,mg-semslthig-le, Skr. bodhicittulbindu 
In the ta11tras and in Tibetan medicine, the generative es!>ences or tluids <lre con­
sidered as .uising irom a supreme seminal point (ting-le chen-pn) located in the 
middle of the heart centre. From the perspective of the ta11tras thi~ supreme seminal 
point IS regarded as the seed of buddhahood and from the perspective of Tibetan 
melbcine it is regarded as the bam of both physical and mental health. This supreme 
seminal point at the heart is considered to be the size of a small pea or large mustard 
seed and it incorporates the pure essences (duangs-mu) of the five clements, the 
presem:e oi which is indicated by its five-coloured glow. hom the perspective of the 
tantras the very subtle vital energy, known as the life-bearing wind or breath, dwells 
inside this seminal point and at the culmination of the intermediate state of the time 
of death all vital energies ultim.ucly dissolve inti> it and the inner radiance of the 
ground d.nvns. During life, a single seminal point abides in each of the five energy 
centres and each seminal point i!> whiter at the top and redder at the bottom. At the 
crown centre the whiter clement predominates and at the level of the genitalia the 
redder element predominates. According to Tibetan medicine, white generative 
fluids are said to produce bone tissue in the embryo, and it is from the bone marrow 
that both semen .md breast milk <He said to be produced. Red gener.uive fluids are 
said to produce blood, tlesh and skin. At their least subtle level, therefore, the former 
are 1denufied with semen and the latter with menstruJl blood. See also under 
Seminal Point. 
Gods lhJ, Skt. del'J 
One of the six classes of living beings ( 'gro-ba rigs-drug). The mode of being and 
activity of the gods is said to be engendered and dominated by exaltation, indulgence 
and pride. The gods exist in realms higher than that of the human realm in the 
world-system of desire (k.Jm,ldh.itu), and also in the world-systems of form (rft{JJ­
dhrJtu) .md formlcssne~-; (,ini{Jy,zdhatu). See Three \\'odd-systems. 
Gods of the Ten Directions ph)'ogs-bcu·, IIhz, Skr. das,zdikpa/,z 
The gods who traditionally are said to preside over the ten directions of space are 
otherwi~e known as the protector deities of the ten dire~:tions, viz.: /ndr,z, Y.1m..z, 
Varu'!a, Yak~..z, Agni, RJk~"sa, V,iyu, BIJtUa, Brulm1rJ, and Van..zdeui or SthauarJ. 
Great Bliss bde-chen, Skt. muh.isuklhl 
In the context of Unsurpassed Yug..ztautra, 'great bliss' refers to the blissful states 
experienced when the meditator enters into union with a partner (either in visualisa­
tion at the beginner's level or in Jctualny at an advanced stage). In both cases, the 
experiences. to he valid, have to arise as a result of the dissolution of mental 
conceptuality and the vital energies which support these conceptual states. Such J 
blissful state of mind, when generated within a direct experience of emptiness, free 
from attachment, becomes what is known as the union of bliss and emptiness. 
Great Perfection rdwgs-{Ju che11-po, Skt. mJhiisandhi 
Great Perfection is <l synonym for Atiyoga, the highest of the nine vehicles according 
to the Nyiugma tr<ldition. Atiyoga is known as the Great Perfection because both the 
generation .md perfection stages of meditation arc effortlessly present. 'Perfection' G L 0 S ~A R Y 0 F K L Y T E R ~IS 473 
(rdzogs) implies rhar the enlightened attributes of the Three Buddha-bodies are 
effortlessly perfected in the stabilisation of the meditator's intrinsic awareness (rang­
rig). l-lere the Buddha-body of Reality (dharmakaya) is the essence or emptiness 
(ngo-bo stong-pa) of intrinsic awareness; the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource 
(sambhogakaya) is irs natural expression Jnd radiance (rang-bzhin gsal-h.:z); and the 
Buddha-body of Emanation (mrm.if!.:zkJy.:z) is its all-pervasive unimpeded com­
passionate energy (m.:z-'gags tlmgs-rie) expressed in physical form. 'Great' (chen) 
implies thJt this perfection is the underlying nature of all things. The tantra texts 
Jnd instructions of Atiyoga, contained in the Collected T antras of the NyingmLZpa, 
are divided into three classes: the Mental Class (sems-sde), which emphasises the 
radiance (gsal-ba'i cha) of the nature of mind (sems-nyid); the Spatial Class (k/ong­
sde) which emphasises the emptiness (stong-pa'i cha) of reality's expanse (dharmad­
hatu); and the Esoteric Instructional Class (man-ngag-gi sde), in which these aspects 
arc gi\'en equal emphas1s and in which the meditative techniques of Cutting through 
Resistance (khrcgs-chod) and All-surpassing Realisation (thod-rgul) le~1d respect­
ively ro the realisation of the Buddha-body of Reality and the Buddha-body of 
Form. 
Great Seal phyag-rgya chen-po, Skt. mahamudra 
According ro the tradition of the siUras, the expression 'Grear ScJl' refers to rhe 
comprehension of emptiness as the all-encompassing ulrimJte nature of reality. 
Emptiness is called the great seal, for nothing extraneous to ir exists, and all 
phenomena, both physical and mentJl, are in their ultimate natures empty of 
inherent existence. Ac.:ording to the tradition of the tantras in generJl, the practice 
of the Grear Seal is considered in terms of ground, path and result. As a 'path', ir 
comprises a sequence of systematic advanced meditations on emptiness and pure 
appcarJnce, integrating the techniques of calm abiding and penetrative insight, 
which focuses on the nature of the meditJtor's own mind. This type of meditation 
is popular in both the Kagyu and Gelug schools of Tibetan Buddhism. As a 'result', 
the expression 'Great Seal' refers ro the stare of buddhahood, rhe conclusive result 
or supreme spiritual accomplishment. According ro the Nyingma school, within the 
conrexr of Maluiyoga in particular, the term refers to the great seal of buddha-body 
which secures the ground-of-all consciousness (a/ayavipiana) as the mirror-like 
pristine cognition. A distinction is also drawn between the supreme accomplishment 
of the Great Seal (phyag-rgya chen-po mchog-gi dngos-gruh), which is to be attained 
in the course of the meditator's lifetime, and the coalescent Buddha-body of the 
Grear Seal (zung-'1ug phyag-rgya chen-po 'i sku), which is identified with the inner 
radiance of rhe Buddha-body of Reality. 
Greater Vehicle thcg-pa chen-po, Skr. mah.iyana 
When the Buddhist teachings are classified according ro their power to le<ld beings 
to an enlightened stare, a disrmcrion is made between rhe teachings of the Lesser 
Vehicle (hinaydna) and those of rhe Greater Vehicle. In terms of motivation, the 
practitioner of the Lesser Vehicle emphasises the individual's own freedom from 
cyclic existence as the primary motivation and goal and the practitioner of the 
Greater Vehicle emphasises altruism and has rhe liberation of all sentient beings as 
the principal objective. As the term 'Greater Vehicle' implies, the path followed by 
bodhisattvas is analogous to a large carriage \Vhich can trJnsporr a vast number of 
people to liberation, Js compared to a smaller vehicle for rhe individual practitioner. 
In terms of philosophy, rhe principal philosophical schools of the Lesser Vehicle are 474 GLOSSARY Of KEY TERMS 
Vaibha~ika and Sautrantika and those of the Greater Vehicle are Cittamatra and 
Madlryamaka.ln terms of the path, the Lesser Vehicle emphasises complete renunci­
ation of dissonant mental states and the practice of the four noble truths and the 
twelve links of dependent origination, while the Greater Vehicle allows the taking 
on to the path of dissonant mental states and emphasises the practice of the six 
perfections. According to the Greater Vehicle, the entire path towards the attainment 
of buddhahood is presented within the framework of two main systems or vehicles 
(yana), those of the sutras (srttrayana) and the tantras (tantrayana). The former, 
also known as the vehicle of bodhisattvas (bodhisattvayana), entails a progression 
from fundamental ignorance to enlightenment which may take place over an 
immeasurable number of lifetimes. The latter, also known as the Vehicle of Inde­
structible Reality (Vajrayana) or the vehicle of secret mantras (guhyamantrayana), 
includes the preliminary practices and the generation and perfection stages of medi­
tation through which it is said that enlightenment can be achieved in a single 
lifetime. 
Ground gzhi 
See under Continuum of the Ground. 
Ground-of-all kun-gzhi, Skt. alaya 
According to the Great Perfection, the ground-of-all is identified with the continuum 
of the ground. This ground-of-all is therefore contrasted with the ground-of-all 
consciousness (Skt. a/ayavijiiJna). See Aggregate of Consciousness. 
Ground-of-all Consciousness kun-gzhi'i rnam-par shes-pa, Skt. iilayavij1idna 
See under Aggregate of Consciousness. 
Guhyagarbhatantra rGyud gsang-ba'i snying-po 
The most all-embracing of the eighteen Mahayoga tantras, focusing specifically on 
the ma'!lfala of the forty-two peaceful deities and the fifty-eight wrathful deities. 
There are three distinct versions of the Guhyagarbhatantra, respectively in 82, 46 
and :z.:z. chapters, and it is the last of these that is most widely studied. All of these 
versions are included within the general cycle of the Tantra of the Magical Net 
(Mayajalatantra). See under Magical Net and Gyurme Dorje's 'Brief Literary 
History'. 
Habitual Tendencies bag-chags, Skt. viisana 
The deep-seated propensities and habitual tendencies inherited from our past 
actions. This concept of habitual tendencies is critical to the Buddhist understanding 
of the causal dynamics of karmic actions as well as its understanding of the process 
of conditioning. For example, when a person commits an act, such as the negative 
act of killing, the act itself does not last. So that which connects the committing of 
this act and the experiencing of its consequence in the future, in some instances in 
a future life, is the habitual tendencies imprinted upon one's psyche by the act 
committed. Similarly, when a strong emotion such as a powerful feeling of h,atred 
arises, although the actual emotion may subside after a while, the experience leaves 
a mark or an imprint, which will continue to have an impact on the person's 
attitudes and emotions as well as behaviour. It is the collection of such countless 
habitual tendencies imprinted in our psyche by dissonant mental states that consti­
tutes the obscuration of misconceptions concerning the known range of phenomena GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 475 
(Skt. jfteyavara'}a), the total eradication of which occurs only when one achieves 
full awakening or buddhahood. Sec Obscuration. 
Hand-gestures phyag-rgya, Skt. mudra 
See Seal. 
Hatred zhe-sdang, Skt. dt·e~a 
Sec A version. 
Hayagriva rta-mgrin 
The name of a wrathful deity, usually red in colour, with a green horse's head and 
neck (rta-mgrin) protruding from amongst the hair on his head. The teachings and 
the texts associated with Hayagriva belong within the sadhana class of Mahayoga, 
where they are known as the tmrtras of buddha-speech. In this respect, Hayagriva 
is considered to be the wrathful counterpart of Avalokitesvara. More generally, as 
in our text, he is depicted as a gatekeeper of certain matJcJ-alas and sacred shrines. 
See Appendix Two. 
Heart-mantra snying-po, Skt. hrdaya 
Sec Mantra. 
Heart-mantra of Dependent Origination rtcn-'brei snying-po, Skt. pratitya­
sanlutpadahrdaya 
The heart-mantra of dependent origination, YE UHARMA HETUI'RABHAVA HETUN 
TE~A¥ TATHAGATO HY AVADAT TE~A.~ CA YO NIROUHO EVA,~ VADI MAHASRA­
MA~AI~, can be translated as 'Whatever events arise from a cause, the Tathagata 
has told the cause thereof, and the great virtuous ascetic also has taught their 
cessation as well.' Sec Mantra and Dependent Origination. 
Hell[Realms]na-rag dmyal-ba'i gnasldnzyal-ba, Skt. naraka 
Sec Eighteen Hells. 
Hermit Buddha rang-rgyal, Skt. pratyekabuddha 
The practitioners of the Lesser Vehicle (hinaytma) include both pious attendants 
(sravaka) and hermit buddhas. Among these, the hermit buddhas are those who 
pursue the path to liberation without relying on a teacher, following a natural 
predisposition. According to Maitreya's Ornament of Emergent Realisation, the 
accomplishment of the hermit buddhas is considered to surpass that of the pious 
attendants in the sense that they realise the emptiness of external phenomena, 
composed of atomic particles, in addition to realising the emptiness of the individual 
personality (pudga/a). However, unlike bodhisattvas they arc said not to realise 
that the internal phenomena of consciousness too are without inherent existence. 
The realisation of a hermit buddha relies not only on the renunciation or monastic 
discipline, which is also undertaken by pious attendants, but on their comprehension 
of the twelve links of dependent origination and ability to reverse these through the 
power of meditation. 
Hero dpa'-bo, Skt. !lira 
Sec Spiritual Hero. 
Heruka khrag-'thzmg!hc-ru-ka 
In general, the term heruka is an epithet for all wrathful male meditational deities, 
although in specific contexts it may refer exclusively to the meditational deity GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Sriheruka and related meditational deities such as Cakrasm'tlvara. In the context of 
the present work, the term refers only to the six wrathful male buddhas: Mahottara 
Heruka, Buddha Heruka, Vajra Heruka, Ratna Heruka, Padma Heruka, and Karma 
Heruka. Literally, the t~:rm can be interpreted as 'blood-drinker', 'blood-drinking 
hero', 'delighting in blood', or 'holding a blood-filled skull'. Set: Appendix Two. 
Higher Existences gnas mthu-ris, Skt. svar;:a 
The three high~:r realms of the gods, amigods, and humans. 
Highest Yoga Tantra hla-med rgyud, Skt. yuganiruttaratuntra 
See Unsurpassed Yogatantra. 
Hundred Sacred Enlightened Families dam-pa rigs-brl{ya 
Those of the forty-two peaceful deities and the fifty-eight wrathful deities. Sec 
Appendix Two. 
Hundred-syllable Mantra yig-brgya 
The hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva may be interpreted as follows: 'o~t 
Vajrasattva! Protect my commitments! Vajrasattva! Let them be firm! Let me be 
steadfast! Let me be satisfied! Let me be nourished! Let me be loved! Bestow all 
accomplishments upon me! With regard to all my past actions, make my mind 
virtuous! HO¥ (seed-syllable of buddha-mind)! HA (four immeasurables)! HA (four 
empowermems)! HA (four delights)! HA (four buddha-bodies)! HOI~ (joyous laugh­
ter)! Transcendent One! Indestructible Reality of all the Tathagatas! Do not forsake 
me! Make me into indestructible reality! Great Being of Commitment! AI,i (non-dual 
union).' The recitation of this mantra, in conjunction with the visualisation of 
Vajrasattva and the confession of negativity, is an essential component of the 
preliminary practices (sngun-'gro). See Chapter r and Vajrasattva. 
Ignorance ma-rig-pa, Skr. avidya 
See under Fundamemal Ignorance. 
Illusion-like Body sgyu-ma'i 1t,1-bu Ius 
See under Illusory Body. 
Illusory Body sgyu-lus 
A specific Vajrayana concept, the term 'illusory body' refers to a unique embodiment 
in which an advanced yogin arises at a high level of the perfection stage according 
to the Unsurpassed Yogatantras. The arising of the yogin in the form of the illusory 
body occurs when an indivisible unity of buddha-body, speech and mind has been 
actualised at the conclusion of the generation and perfection stages of meditation. 
The attainment of the illusory body is divided into two stages; the attainment of the 
impure illusory body (ma dag-pa'i sgyu-lus) and then attainment of the pure illusory 
body (dag-pa'i sgyu-lus). The first stage is called impure because the yogin is still 
not totally free from all habitual tendencies that obstruct subtle knowledge. When 
the yogin attains the pure illusory body, which is in union with inner radiance, this 
marks the attainment of the highest union that is the full awakening of buddhaoovd, 
the atrainment of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. According to the perfection 
stage of meditation, there are distinctive meditations which focus on the impure 
illusory body and the pure illusory body. In the former case, the meditation focuses 
on all physical phenomena as being dream-like and illusory in manner, without 
inherent existence. In the latter case, the meditation focuses on the ma'!qala of GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 477 
deities visualised according to the so-called twelve similes of illusion (sgyu-ma'i dpe 
bcu-gnyis). 
Impermanence mi-rtag-pa, Skt. anitya 
Impermanence, along with suffering and the absence of self-identity, is regarded in 
Buddhism as one of the three marks or characteristics of causally conditioned 
phenomena. Although Buddhist literature mentions various degrees of imperma­
nence, in general it can be defined as the momentarily changing nature of all things. 
Nothing endures through time without change, and the process of change is dynamic 
and never ending, reflecting the nature of flux and fluidity in conditioned existence. 
This fundamental quality of impermanence extends to both the external world and 
the perceiving mind. 
Imprecatory Female Spirits ma-mo, Skt. matara~ 
The imprecatory female spirits are generally depicted as ugly, ferocious, dark­
complexioned, and half-naked with emaciated breasts and matted hair. They invoke 
curses and imprecations, inflicting plague (dal-yams) on living beings. The mundane 
imprecatory female spirits of Tibet were subdued by Padmasambhava on Mount 
Chuwori, while the supramundane category includes the protectress Sridevi (Tib. 
dpal-ldan lha-mo) in the form Remari, and the eight mataral? (ma-mo brgyad) 
headed by Gauri, who form one subcategory of the fifty-eight wrathful deities. See 
Appendix Two. One of the eight principal rneditational deities of the Mahiiyoga 
sadhana class is known as Imprecatory Matara~ (ma-mo rbod-gtong). 
Incalculable Aeon grangs-med bskal-pa, Skt. asa~khyeyakalpa 
The expression incalculable aeon indicates a period of time equivalent to 10 to the 
power of 59 lesser aeons. 
Indestructible Chains of Inner Radiance 'od-gsal rdo-rje lu-gu-rgyud 
The appearance of indestructible chains of light or inner radiance occurs through 
the meditative technique known as All-surpassing Realisation (thod-rgal), according 
to the Great Perfection (rdzogs-pa chen-po). The arising of these chains of light is 
an indication of the natural expression (rang-bzhin) of intrinsic awareness (rang-rig), 
through which the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource becomes manifest. 
Indestructible Cross-legged Posture rdo-rje'i skyil-krung, Skt. vajrasana 
Contrasted with the 'lotus posture' (Skt. padmasana), this 'indestructible posture' 
is formed by crossing the legs with the feet upturned and folded along the thighs. 
In the case of the indestructible posture the right leg is folded above the left, whereas 
in the lotus position the left leg is folded over the right. This is one of the optimum 
recommended meditation postures, included in the Seven-point Posture of Vai­
rocana. 
Indestructible Expanse rdo-rje'i dbyings, Skt. vajradluitu 
Generally a synonym for the expanse of reality (Skt. dharmadhatu) or emptiness. 
In certain contexts it also refers to the name of the central figures of the Vajradhatu 
ma~u!ala of the Yogatantras. 
Indestructible Hell rdo-rje dmyal-ba, Skt. vajranaraka 
A synonym for the hell of ultimate torment (Skt. Avici), which relates to the 
admonition that those who violate their commitments in respect of the Vehicle of 
Indestructible Reality are reborn there. See Eighteen Hells. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Indestructible Reality rdo-rje, Skt. ua1ra 
The fully enlightened buddha-body, speech and mind are described as indestructible 
reality. This suggests that the fruitional attributes of buddhahood are adamantine 
and indivisible, for they arc invulnerable to all degrees of physical, verbal and 
mental defilement. 
Individual Disciplines so-sor thar-pu, Skt. priitimok~a 
See under Pratimok~a. 
Inherent Existence rung-nKo-bo-nyid, Skt. suabhauat,i 
The term 'inherent existence' refers to the ontological status of phenomena, accord­
ing to which phenomena arc attributed with existence in their own right, inherently, 
in and of themselves, objectively, and independent of any other phenomena such as 
our conception and hlbelling. The Madhyamaka schools of thought refute such a 
nature of existence and argue that nothing exists inherently, for nothing can be 
found to exist independently from conceptuality' and labelling when scrutinised 
through an ultimate analysis. The Madlryamaka schools hold that things exist only 
conventionally and their existence can be validated only within a relative framework 
of conventional reality. Absence of such an ontological reality, i.e. the absence of 
the inherent existence of all phenomena, is defined as the true nature of reality, 
emptiness, by the Madhyamaka schools and hy the tantras. 
Inner Radiance 'od-gsal, Skt. prabhiisl'<lra 
Sometimes also translated as 'clear light', the Tibetan term 'ad-gsa/, which has been 
rendered here as 'inner radiance', refers in the context of the perfection stage of 
meditation (Skt. samfhumakrama) to the subtlest level of mind, i.e. the fundamental, 
essential nature of all our cognitive events. Though ever present within all sentient 
beings, this inner radiance becomes manifest only when the gross mind has ceased 
to function. Such a dissolution is experienced by ordinary beings, naturally, at the 
time of death, but it can also be experientially cultivated through the practices of 
Unsurpassed Yogatautra. A fundamental distinction is made between the inner 
radiance of the ground (gzhi'i 'od-gsa/) and the inner radiance of the path (/am-gyi 
'od-gsal). The former, which is also known as the 'mother inner radiance' ('ad-gsa/ 
ma), occurs naturally at the time of death, when it indicates the presence of the 
Buddha-body of Reality (dharmakaya), but which may not be accompanied by an 
awareness of its nature. The latter, which is also known as the 'child inner radiance' 
('ad-gsa/ bu) is an awareness of the ultimate nature of mind cultivated by the 
meditator in life, i.e. the realisation of the nature of the 'mother inner radiance' as 
it is developed in meditation. Buddhahood is achieved when the 'mother inner 
radiance' and 'child inner radiance' conjoin. See Chapters 8, 10 and r I. Chapter 
1 1, in particular, differenti.ues three successive phases of inner radiance which are 
experienced at the time of death and immediately thereafter: the primary inner 
radiance (bar-Jo J,mg-po chos-nyid 'od-gsal), which is identified with the inner 
radiance of the ground, the secondary inner radiance (bar-do 'od-gsal gnyis-pa), 
which is identified with the inner radiance of the path, and the tertiary inner radiaoce 
(bar-do 'od-gs,d gsum-pu), which is identified with the subsequent arising of the 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities during the intermediate state of reality (chos-11yid 
htlr-do). GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 479 
Inner Tantras of Skilful Means n.mg thabs-kyi rgyud 
The collective name for the tantras of Mahayoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga. See also 
under Vehicle. 
Intentional Lineage of the Conquerors rgyal-ba dgo11gs-pa 'i brgyud-pa 
According to the Nyiugma school, the Buddhist teachings arc said to have been 
transmitted through six lineages (brgyud-pa drug). Among these, the first, which is 
known as the 'intentional lineage of the conquerors', refers to the enlightened 
intention (dgongs-pa) of Samantabhadra, which confers the realisation of the atcm­
poral Buddha-body of Reality, as a blessing upon the male and female buddhas of 
the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. 
Intermediate State bar-do, Skt. antarJbhava 
The original usage of the term within the literature of classical Buddhist abhidhanna 
suggests that it referred exclusively to the period between the time of death and the 
time of rebirth. According to the Nyingma and Kagyu schools, however, the term 
'intermediate state' refers to key phases of life and death identified as: the intermedi­
ate state of living (rang-bzhilz b.:~r-Ju), the intermediate state of meditative concen­
tration (bsam-gtan bar-do), the intermediate state of dreams (rmi-lam 
b,;r-do ), the intermediate state of the time of death ( 'chi-kha 'i bar-do ), the intermedi­
ate state of reality (chos-nyid bar-do) and the intermediate state of rebirth (srid-pa'i 
bar-do). During each of these phases, the consciousness of a sentient being has 
particular experiential qualities, and corresponding to these qualities of experience 
there are specific meditative techniques conducive to realisation of the ultimate 
nature of mind and phenomena. See Chapter 3 and individual entries below. 
Intermediate State of Dreams rmi-lam bur-do 
The intermediate state of dreams begins from the moment of falling asleep and ends 
when we awake. This intermediate state offers the opportunity for the practitioner 
to recognise the similarity between the illusory nature of dreams and that of our 
waking state. This practice is cultivated in the context of dream yoga where the 
ability to maintain awareness of the ultimate nature of mind and phenomena during 
both deep sleep and dreaming is refined. 
Intermediate State of Living rang-bzhin bar-do 
The intermediate state of living begins at the time of birth and continues until the 
time of death. Having obtained a precious human form with the ability to recognise 
our actual condition, the opportunity arises to adopt a way of life and to engage in 
the practices that lead to buddhahood. See Chapters 3 and I, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7· 
Intermediate State of Meditative Concentration bsam-gtan bar-do 
The intermediate state of meditative concentration entered during the waking state 
provides the opportunity for the practitioner to cultivate meditative equipoise (sam­
abita, Tib. mnyam-bzhag) and thereby to achieve stability in the generation and 
perfection stages of meditation. This in turn deepens an unbroken awareness of the 
ultimate nature of mind and phenomena in post-meditative activities and prepares 
the meditator for the intermediate state of the time of death. See Chapters 3 and I, 
2, 4, 5, 6 and 7· 
Intermediate State of Reality chos-nyid bar-do 
The intermediate state of actual reality arises after the intermediate state of the time 
of death ( 'chi-kha'i bar-do) and before the intermediate state of rebirth (srid-pa'i GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
bar-Jo). Here the opportunity oc~.:urs, based on the pr<Ktices adopted during one's 
lifetime, ro recognise the natural purity and natural transformative qualities of the 
ultimate nature of mind in the form of luminosities, rays, sounds and meditational 
deities. See Chapters 3 and 1 1. 
Intermediate State of Rebirth snJ-pa'z b,IT-do 
The intermediate state of rebirth is entered after the intermediate state of reality 
when the cons~.:iousness arises in the form of a mental body, conditioned by the 
individual's inheritance of past actions, and the individual begins to experience both 
the surroundings where he or she died and the unfolding of experiential states 
driven by the momentum of past actions. If liberation from cyclic existence is not 
a~.:hieved during this intermediate state it comes to an end at the moment of concep­
tion. Since consciousness is said to possess certain heightened qualnies during this 
period there is a potential to achieve liberation, or at the very least a favourable 
rebirth, at various key stages as this state is traversed. See Chapters 3 and I 1. 
Intermediate State of the Time of Death 'chi-klhl'i bar-Jo 
The intermediate state of the rime of death is entered at the rime when the process 
of dying definitively begins, and ends with the onset of the intermediate state of 
reality. It includes the gradual dissolution of the five elements and their asso~.:iated 
modes of consciousness and ~.:ulminates with the arising of the inner radiance of the 
ground (gzhi'i 'od-gs.;/). The natural arising of inner radiance immediately after 
respiration ceases is regarded as a supreme opportunity to realise the Buddha-body 
of Reality. See Chapters 3, H, 10 and 11. 
Intrinsic Awareness rung-rig, Skt. suasa~u·ittilsuasu~weduna 
According to Indian Buddhist epistemology, and particularly in the writings of the 
great logicians DzKnJga and Dharmakirti, the term smsm~wedanu refers to the 
apperceptive or reflexive faculty of consciousness, for which reason it is sometimes 
rendered as 'reflexive awareness' or 'apperceptive awareness'. However, in the view 
of the Great Perfection (rdzogs-pa chen-po) and in the context of the present 
work, the same term refers to the fundamental innate mind in irs natural state of 
spontaneity and purity, beyond the alternating states of motion and rest and the 
subject-object dichotomy. It is therefore rendered here as 'intrinsic awareness'. As 
such, intrinsic awareness gives the meditator access to pristine cognition or the 
buddha-mind itself, and it stands in direct contrast to fundamental ignorance (aui­
dya), which is the primary cause of rebirth in cyclic existence (sm~zsdra). The direct 
introduction to intrinsic awareness is a distinctive reaching within the Nyingma 
school and the principal subject matter of Chapter 4· This pradice is a central 
component of the Esoteric Instructional Class (up,zde5,l) of Atiyoga, where it is 
known as Cutting through Resistance (klnegs-chod). See also Awareness and Mind. 
Intrinsic Awareness which is Pristine Cognition rang rig-pa 'i ye-:>hes 
Generally this term refers to the pristine cognition arising from the direct realisation 
of emptiness by a sublime being (arya, Tib. 'phags-pa) in the context of Jeep 
meditative equipoise. This is so called because the nature and qualities of that 
cxpcricnn• can never be fully conveyed by means of language <llld words but remains 
totally cv1dent to the yogin himself. In the context of the Great Perfection however, 
as exemplified by our text, the fusion of the meditator's intrinsic awareness with 
the pnsrinc cognition of buddha-mind indicates nor only that intrinsic awareness GLO~SARY Of KEY TERMS 
provides access to buddha-mind, but that the idcmity of the two has been fully 
rc.tliscd. Sec also Intrinsic Awareness and Pristine Cognition. 
Introduction ngo-sprod 
A genre of pith instructions in which the nature of actual reality or intrinsic aware­
ness is formally introduced (rzg-pu'i ngo-sprod), in a clear immediate manner, by a 
qualified spiritual teacher. Sec Chapter 4· 
Invitation spyan-'dren-pa, Skt. upanun,mtra'!-a 
The term 'invitation' refers ro the meditative process of the tantras, whereby the 
actual mcditational deity or Being of Pristine Cognition ( jiianasattl'a, Tib. ye-shes 
s!'ms-Jp.1') is formally in\'itcd by the meditator to enter into the previously visualised 
form, known as the Being of Commitment (samayasattu.l, T1b. dam-tshzg 
scms -dp.1'). 
Jambudvipa 'dzum-lm gling 
See under Four Continents and Eight Subcontinents. 
Kagyu bk.J'-brgyud 
One of the four main traditions or schools of Tibetan Buddhism. The Kagyu lineage 
tradition stems from the great accomplished masters (mahasiddha) of India such as 
Tzlop.1, N.Jropa and Maztrifhl through to Khyzmgpo Neljor, who founded the 
Sl:.mgp.z Kag:ru lineage. and ,\1.Jrpu Lotsau•a, who formed the Dagpo Kag)'U lineage. 
The latter compri~es four major sub-schools, namely the Karm.1pa, the Tshalpa, the 
B.mml{hl and the Ph.zgmodrupu, the last of which is further d1vided into the 
branches of the Drigung{JJ, T.zglungpa, Drukpa, Yaz.1ng, Troplm, Shugscb, Yelpa, 
and Afurtshung. These traditions inrcgratc practices derived from both the sutras 
and the tmztras. There IS a puticular emphasis on the Great Seal (Mah.imudra) 
sy~tern of practice and on perfection stage practices such as the Six Y ogas of Naropa. 
Kjmariipa k,z-mu ru-pa 
A traditional name corresponding to parts of modern Assam in north-cast India 
and the adjacent Sylhct region of BangiJdesh. 
K<tngyur and Tengyur bk,z'-bstan mam-gn)·is 
The Kangyur is the Tibetan Buddhist canon containing the original sutras and 
tmrtras translated from Indl<ln sources. The Kmzgyur, as we now know it, was 
formalised as a complete collection by the great fourteenth-century Tibetan scholar 
and encyclopaedist Buton Rmchendrub. Buton was also instrumental in the compi­
lation of the Tcngyur, the canonical collection containing translations of authoritat­
ive Indian commcntanal works. !\1any manuscript vers10ns of these anthologies 
were prepared over the centuries, and important xylographic editions were pub­
il~hed at Narthang, Derge, Lhas.z, Utang, Cho-ne, and Bez1ing. • Kangyur' 
(bka'-'gyur) literally means the translated sacred words or transmitted precepts of 
the buddhas, and 'Tengyur' (bstan-'g)•ur)', the translated commentaries. 
Kankal)idharal)i ku1i-k,z-~zi g.::.ungs 
The name of an incantation text associated with Ak~obhya- Vajrasattva, through 
which ofierings are n1.1de on behalf of the deceased. 
Karma l.1s 
See Past Actions. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Karma Family las-kyi rigs, Skt. karmakula 
One of the five enlightened families (pancakula) into which the mcditational deities 
of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource are subdivided. The deities of the Karma 
family include the peaceful buddhas Amoghasiddhi and Samayatara and the corre­
sponding wrathful aspects Karma Heruka and Karmakrodhest•ari. See Appendix 
Two. 
Karma Lingpa karma gling-pa 
Karma Lingpa (fl. fourteenth century) is the treasure-finder who extracted from Mt 
Gampodar in Dakpo the cycle of teachings known as the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Deities: A Profound Sacred Teaching, [entitled] Natural Liberation through [Recog­
nition of] Enlightened Intention (Zhi-khro dgongs-pa rang-groi), to which our 
present text belongs. See Gyurme Dorje's 'Brief Literary History'. 
Karmaprasiddhi byang-phyogs las-rab brtsegs-pa'i zhing-khams 
The northern buddha field of the 'Mound of ExceHent Activities' (Karmaprakat,z), 
otherwise known as the 'Matrix of Enlightened Activities' (Tib. las-rab grub-pa, 
Skr. KarmafJrasiddhi), is the paradise presided over by the male buddha Amogha­
siddhi. See Appendix Two. 
Kaya sku 
See Buddha-body. 
Khafv:lliga kha{-vanga 
Literally meaning 'bedpost', the kha{vii1iga is a tantric staff, comprising a long 
eight-sided shaft of white sandalwood, sealed with a half-vajra at its base, and a 
crossed-vajra at its top, replete with streamers and surmounted by stacked skulls 
and human heads, indicative of the energy centres of body, speech and mind within 
the subtle body. In general, the kha{viinga symbolises the union of great bliss and 
emptiness. 
King Spirits rgyal-po 
A class of male spirits who are said to have assumed their particular forms through 
a preponderance of anger and hatred. Their many mundane forms are to be differen­
tiated from the five supramundane forms of the protector deity Pehar (rgyal-po sku 
lnga), which are respectively known as the kings of body, speech, mind, attributes 
and activities. 
Kriyatantra bya-ba'i rgyud 
The first of the three outer classes of tantra, which form one subcategory of the six 
classes of tantra, and the fourth of the nine vehicles, according to the Nyingma 
school of Tibetan Buddhism. Kriyatantra emphasises outer ritual practices such as 
the making of offerings, prostration, and praises to the meditational deity visualised 
in the space before one. 
KYE HO kye-ho 
An exclamation of astonishment or wonder. 
Lake-dwelling Medicinal Spirits mtsho-sman/'tsho-sman 
A group of five, seven or nine female spirits of the sman-mo class who dwell in lakes, 
and who are differentiated from the sky-dwelling medicinal spirits (nam-mkha'i 
sman-mo), the earth-dwelling medicinal spirits (sa'i sman-mo), and the hybrid 
serpentine-medicinal spirits (k/u-sman). In general, the sman-mo are a category GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
of indigenous Tibetan spirits, to whom medicinal tonna-offerings (sman-gtor), 
compounded of medicines, nectars and blood, are made. Foremost among them are 
the five sisters of longevity (tshe-ring mched-lnga), who are embodied in the five 
main snow peaks of the Everest range. The most powerful of these medicinal spirits 
arc said to have been bound under an oath of allegiance by Padmasambhava at 
Silma in Tsang. 
Lay Vows dge-bsnyen-gyi sdom-pa, Skt. upasakavrata 
See Pratimok~a and Vows. 
Lesser Vehicle theg-dman, Skt. hinayana 
See Greater Vehicle, Hermit Buddhas and Pious Attendants. 
'Liberating' Avengers sgrol-ging 
This is the name of a class of male sword-wielding spirits, collectively known as 
the skyes-bu ging-chen, who are invoked in order to enact the wrathful rites of 
'liberation'. 
Liberation grol-balsgrol-ba, Skt. mok~a 
In a Buddhist context, the term liberation refers specifically to freedom from cyclic 
existence, the karmically conditioned cycle of death and rebirth, and consequently 
to freedom from all forms of physical and mental suffering. Such a liberation can 
be attained only through the total elimination of fundamental ignorance and the 
dissonant mental states, including attachment and aversion, which afflict the mind 
and perpetuate the cycle of existence. 
Lifelong Companion Gods 'go-ba'i lha 
This is a category of spirits who arc said to accompany an individual throughout 
his or her life, like a shadow, protecting the vitality (bla) of the individual. five 
types of lifelong companion god ('go-ba'i lha lnga) are specifically identified: the 
gods of the life-essence (srog-gi-lha), the gods of masculinity (pho-lha), the gods of 
femininity (mo-lha), the gods of the countryside (yul-lha), and the gods of inimical 
force (dgra-lha). 
Lineage brgyud-pa, Skt. paratttpara 
An unbroken line of successive teachers through whom the Buddhist teachings arc 
transmitted. According to the Nyingma tradition, six forms of lineage are described: 
r) the intentional lineage of the conquerors (rgyal-ba'i dgongs-brgyud), through 
which the Buddha-body of Reality communicates the teachings to the Buddha-body 
of Perfect Resource; 2) the symbolic lineage of awareness holders (rig-'dzin brda 'i 
brg)'ud-fJa), through which non-human and human awareness holders of the highest 
spiritual accomplishments symbolically receive the teachings from bodhisattvas of 
the tenth level; 3) the aural lineage of authoritative personages (gang-zag snyan­
khung-gi brgyud-pa), through which accomplished masters orally transmit the 
teachings from one generation to the next; 4) the lineage empowered by enlightened 
aspiration (smon-lam dbang-bskur-gyi brgyud-pa), through which a treasure-finder 
of concealed texts is identified by their concealer's solemn affirmation, 5) the lineage 
of prophetically declared spiritual succession (bka'-bahs lung-bstan-gyi hrgyud-pa), 
through which a treasure-finder of concealed texts is identified from the authoritat­
ive prophesies of Padmasambhava, and 6) the lineage of the 4akini's seal of 
entrustment (mkha'-'gro gtad-rgya'i brgyud-pa ), through which a treasure-finder is GLO~SARY OF KEY TERMS 
granted ~.:odified teachings by the lords of the treasure m fulfilment of the concealer's 
former aspiration. 
Lineage Holder brgyud-pa 'i 'd<.in-pa, Skt. parm!zparadhara 
One who maintains any of the six lineages and takes responsibility for their con­
tinued transmission from one generation to the next. See previous entry. 
Longchen Rabjampa klrmg-c:hen rab-'hyams-pa 
A prolific writer ( 1308-6 3 ), regarded as one of the greatest masters of the Nyi11gma 
school, Longchen RubJampu is renowned for his systematic commentaries on the 
nine vehicles, the perspective of Atiyoga, and his revelation of the texts and practices 
contained in the Four-{hzrt Innermost Spirituality (sNying-thig ya-bzhi). His com­
mentary on the Guhyagarbhatantra, entitled Dzspelling the Darkness u( the Ten 
Directzons (Phyogs-hc:u'i num-se/), is an important source, clarifying the ma1.uJala 
of the forty-two peaceful deities and the fifty-eight wrathful deities from the perspec­
tives of the ground, path, and result. 
Lotus padma 
ln Buddhist poetry and the visual arts the lotus, particularly the variety which grows 
in water, is often used as a symbol of purity_ The lotus grows from an unclean mire, 
yet it is clean and unpolluted by the mire surrounding it. One finds the lotus depicted 
as the cushion or seat of many meditational deities in Buddhist tantric iconography_ 
Among the five enlightened families, the Padma or Lotus family (pudma'z rtgs) is 
that of the buddha AmztJbha. 
Lotus Light Pala..:e padma 'od-kyi fJho-br.mg 
The palace or operational field of Padmasambhava. See under Mal)9ala. 
Love/Loving Kindness byLlms-pa, Skr. m,zitri 
ln a Buddhi~t context, loving kindness is defined as a mental factor characterised 
by a sin..:ere wish that others enjoy happiness. According to this definition, love is one 
of the eleven 'wholesome mental factors' categorised in the abhidharma literature. 
However, in the case of the four immeasurable aspirations, the word love is used 
as an abbreviation for 'great love' (byams-pa chen-pu, Skr_ mahiimaitri) which refers 
to an altruisti..: mental attitude that is unbiased in its love towards all beings and is 
also spontaneous and naturaL It is said that su..:h a spontaneous sense of universal 
or unqualified love l:an only arise as a result of a systemati..: meditative training and 
an understanding of emptiness. 
Lower Existences ngan-song, Skt. durgatz 
The realms of the animals, anguished spirits, and hells. 
Lower Vital Energy 'og-gi rlung 
The vital energy located at the lower extremity of the central energy channel within 
the subtle body. See Vital Energy. 
Madhyamaka dlm-ma 
Derived from the Sanskrit expression m.Jdhyamapratipad, meaning the '.Mi9dlr 
Way' between the extremes of eternalism and nihilism, which was expounded by 
Sakyanru11i Buddha in the earliest sutras, Madhyamak.1 (dlm-ma) is the name of 
one of the most influential among the four classical s..:hools of Indian Buddhist 
philosophy_ Within the context of the M.1dhyamJka school, the ~Iiddle Way refers 
to the doctrine of emptiness (sunyut.l), which is held to be the ultimate nature of all <.; I. 0 S S A I{ Y 0 I' K E Y T 1: I{ .\1 S 
things. According to this view, all phenomena, whether mental or physical, cannot 
be found to possess any independent or self-validating natures, and their existence 
and identity arc regarded as valid only within a relative framework of worldly 
convention. Further, it is propounded that not only do phenomena exist solely 
in dependence upon causes and conditions, but even their idenrities depend on 
conceptions and labelling. 1\:cverthclcss, th1s sehoul holds that, unlike mere fan­
tasies, such as unicorns for example, phenomena do exist conventionally and their 
ontology must he accepted as v.tlid. Such a metaphysical position is designated the 
'Middle \X'ay' in that it is the mid-point between the extremes of total non-existence 
of reality, or nihilism, and the positing of an absolute, independent existence of 
reality, or eternalism. founded by Nagarjutta in the second century AD, the Madhya­
m..Jka schooll.uer evolved two sub-divisions: J>rJsarigzka and Su.it.mtrika, based on 
the different interpretations of .\",rgar,una's vic\vs whKh were made by Buddhapd!Jta 
{later elucidated by Candrakirti) and Bhavauzveka respectively. The Tibetan tra­
dition, while recognising Bhauaviueka's important contribution to Buddhist logic 
and philosophy, considers the Pnlsmigika technique of reductio ad uhsurdum to be 
the most refined logical method in Buddhism for establishing the view of emptiness. 
The distmctivc feature of the Pr.is .. uigzk.I school is its total denial of any ontology 
implying inherent existence of either external objects or subjective consciousness. 
There is also, according to some Tibetan interpretations, the tradition known as the 
Great M,rdlryamak.I which in the coursc of meditative insight distinguishes between 
the intrinsic emptiness of phenomena (rung-stong) and the extrinsic emptiness of 
pure buddha attributes (g-;.h,m-stuns:). 
Magical Net sgyu-'plmt! drva-ba, Skt. M.iydja/a 
Thc most all-embracing cycle of texts among the eighteen Mahayoga tantras, 
focusing specifically on the mm.ujala of the forty-two peaceful deities and the 
fifty-eight wrathful deities, and including within its corpus the Gulryagarbhatantra. 
As such, it is the basis for all subsequent expositions of this particular ma~z4ala, 
including the present work. Sec Gyurmc Doric's 'Brief Literary History'. 
Magon Chamdrcl 111.1-mgon lcam-dral 
An epithct of the protcctress Fk.r,,z{i and Dorje Lekpa, who arc rcvcrcd as the 
foremost supr.unundanc protector deities, according to the Atiyoga tradition of the 
Nyingma school. 
Mahakala mgmz-pu 11ag-po 
Thl.' supramundanc protector de1ty Af.zh,lkJ!a is a wrathful manifestation of Avalo­
kite5t•ara. The meditative practiccs associated with this protector are popular in all 
four traditions of Tibet<ll1 Buddhism. 
Mahakarul)ika tlmgs-rje chm-po 
The thousand-armed form of Avalokitesvara. See Avalokitdvara. 
Mahayana thes:-pa che11-pu 
Sec Greater V chicle. 
Mahayoga mal-'byor chen-pu 'i rgyud 
The seventh of the nine vehicles, <lnd first of the three inner clas~es of tantras, 
according to the Nyingma school. M.Ih.iyog,r emplusises thc generation stage of 
mcJnation (utp.Ittikram.r) and the gradual vi~ualisation of elaborate ma1_uj.zlas of 
deities. Ir comprises eighteen basic tatttras, such as Guhyagarbha, Guhyasamdfa, GLOSSARY Of KEY TERMS 
and BuddhusumJyo~u, as well as a vast number of tantra texts associated with the 
so-called c:ight classes of means for attainment (sgrub-pa bku '-brgyad), which focus 
respectively on the deities Yamantaka, Hayawiva, Srihcruka, Vajriim~ta, Vajrakila, 
M,U.zr.zl?, LokastotraJlltJ•l ( '1ig-rtcn mchod-bstod), and Va,ramantrabhiru (rmod-pa 
drug-sn~u~s). These tc:xts are all contained in the Collected Tantras of the Nying­
mafhl (rNymg-mu'i r~yud-'bum), and a small but important seb.:tion of them is 
<tlso cont;.uned in the Kangyur. 
Maitreya rgyal-hu by.zms-pa 
M,utrey,z is the embodiment of the great loving kindness (mahamaztri) of all the 
buddhas, as visu<tliscd in the form of a meditational deity. Maitreya therefore 
represents thl· perkcted state of the faculty of love/loving kindness inherent within 
each individual's mental continuum. In addition, M.zitreya is also revered as an 
emincm historical figure, a bodhisattva who was one of the eight principal bodhi­
sattva di-;ciples of S,zkyamzmi Buddha. It is to him that the hue Works of Maitreya 
(By,mzs-d}()s sdc-lng,z) are attributed. According to the classical sutra literature it 
is the bodhisattva J'vf..Iztreya who is the coming buddha, fifth in the line of one 
thousand buddhas (Sakyamuni being the fourth) who will descend to this world 
during the auspicious aeon. Currently he is said to be residing in the god re<tlm of 
Tu~ita. He is also one of the four outer male bodhisattvas among the forty-two 
peaceful deities. Sec Appendix Two. 
Major and Minor Marks mtsh.zn-dpe, Skt. lak~al.tiinuuyatiJanr.J 
The Buddha-body of Supreme Emanation is characterised by thirty-two major 
marks (Skt. duiitrzms,m-nz,zhJfmmsr.Jiaksun.z) and eighty minor marks (Skt. 
asit)'r.llllW)'<lllJI111J), w.hich are .til enur~terar'ed in Maitreya's Ornament of Emerxent 
Rea/is,ztwn (Abhzsallr.1yJI,ll~lkJra, T 3786, vv. 13-17 and 21-32). These include 
an array of perfected features of body and speech, which according to the commen­
taries are the specitlc results of diverse aspects of a buddha's conduct. 
Malevolent/Beguiling Forces hdud, Skt. miira 
Buddhist literature speaks of four kinds of beguiling influences which are the 
ohsucles that impede one's spiritual transformation. These are the influence of: our 
impure psycho-physicJI aggregates (sk.zndha); our dissonant mental states (klesa); 
deva's son (dcL1r.1putra), which refers to sensual desires and temptations; and the 
lord of death (m~·tyufhltz), which refers to ordinary death, at the point of which 
rebirth in cyclic existence continues rather than the attainment of buddhahood. As 
recordeJ in the life of Sakyamuni Buddha, these archetypal forces projected images 
of desire and terror which were designed to interrupt his meditative equipoise, just 
prior to his attainment of manifestly perfect buddhahood at Bodhg.zya in India. 
Mal)~ala dkyil-'khor 
The s~mskrit word 'llt.ll_r,.f,z/.z' conveys a number of meanings- circle, wheel, circum­
fcrerKe, tot.tlity, assembly or literary corpus. In the context of Anuyogu and Atiyoga, 
the expression 'three m<II,Z,,fulas' specifically refers to the scope of buddha-body, 
speech anJ mind. Then, in a more general usage, this term indicates the central 
(dkyil) and peripheral ('k/}()r) deities described in the tantra texts. These deities 
reside within a celestial palace (z•imdiJ,l), which generally has a perfectly symmetrical 
des1gn- wnh four gateways and four main walls composed of five layers of different 
colours, e;tch of the katures corresponding to a particular aspect of the principo1l 
Jeity·.,, and thereby to the meditator's, pure awareness and purity of perception. GLO~SARY Of KEY TER:\-15 
The nz,z~ztjala rhus represents a perfected state of being and perception encompassing 
all phenomena. The celestial palace itself and the deities within it symholise the 
perfected states of the meditator's own awareness, psycho-physical aggregates, 
elemental properties, sensory and mental processes, etc. When such m,z~tjalas arc 
represented symholically, they may rake the form of a two-dimensional image on 
painted cloth, or they may be made of coloured sand, or else constructed as a 
three-dimensional structure, carved from wood or other m;HeriJis. The visualisation 
of ma1.u,fa/us in their rhree-dimemional form plays a crucial role tn the generation 
stage of meditation. Here, these 'abodes of the deity' arc never perceived of as 
independently existing universes but as mJnifestarions of the pristine cognition of 
the principal meditational deity being meditated upon. The symholism of the 
mm.u.falu of forty-two peaceful deities and fifty-eight wrJthful deities, as it rcbtes 
to our text, is given in Appendix T\VO . 
.Ma~9ala of Offerings mchod-p.z 'z m,z~zc,f.zl 
The m.u.z<j.zla of offerings is one of the preliminary practices (sn.~oll-'gru), in whid1 
offerings are visualised and offered to the spiritual teacher, medit.ttional deity or 
Three Precious Jewels. In general, there are outer, inner, and secret ma~z~ala offer­
ings, corresponding to the Three Buddha-bodies of emanation, perfect resource and 
actual reality. In the first, the entire external material universe, symbolised by Mount 
Sumern and the four continents, ere, is offered, usually using a circular metal hase 
on which arc arranged small heaps of rice; second, the inner nz,z~u,lui.J of offerings 
comprises the subtle body, complete with its energy channels, currents of vital 
energy and seminal points; and, third, the secret m.u.z..f.llu of offerings is th.tt of 
actual reality or the ultimate nature of mind. In the preliminary pr.tctices all these 
are offered one hundred thousJnd rimes as Jn antidote for attachment. 
Manjusri ·,am-dp.z/ 
Maiijusri is the embodiment of the discriminative awareness of all the buddhas, 
manifesting in the form of a meditational deity. He is normally depicted in his 
seated posture, holding a sword in his right h.tnd (representing discriminative 
awareness) and a sacred text in his left hand (indicating his mastery of all know­
ledge) . .M.ziiJusri is also revered as an eminent histoncal figure who \\'JS one of the 
eight principal bodhisattva d1sciples of the Buddba; and he is also one of the four 
outer male bodbisattvas among the forty-two peaceful deities. Sec Appendix Two. 
Mantra sngags 
The Sanskrit word m.zntra is an abhreviation of two syllables mana and trayu, 
respectively meaning 'mind' and 'protection'. Hence 'muntra' literally refers to 
'protection of the mind'. The essenrial indication here is the protection of the mmd 
from the overwhelming influence of ordinMy perceptions and conceptions, which 
give rise to deluded stares of existence, thus inhibiting the full expression of buddha 
nature. More specifically, m.mtra refers to the pure sound which is the perfected 
speech of an enlightened being. The aim of the generation stage practices is the 
cultivation of the mode of being of the meditational deity, that is ro say the 
transformation of mundane body, speech and mind into buddha-body, speech and 
mind. This is supported in ritual practice by the enactment of the h,llld-gcsturcs or 
seals (mudra), which arc the resonance of buddha-body, by nt.Jntra recitation, which 
is the resonance of buddha-speech, and hy visualisation, which is the rcsonJnce of 
buddha-mind. In general, three types of mJIItra arc differentiated: mantras of GLOSSARY lH KEY TERMS 
retention (Skt. Jhdr.JI_li, Tib. gzungs-sng,lgs), gnostic mantr,zs (Skt. vidy.lm,mtr.J, 
Tib. rt~-sn~.zgs), and secret mantras (Skt. guhy.mz.zntra, Tib. gs.zng-sng,;gs). Among 
these, the first comprises the m,;ntr.ls associated with the sutras \vhich are de~igned 
to inrensify discriminative awareness, the second are associated with specific deities 
of the outer tantras, and designed to imensify skilful means, while the third arc 
associated with the inner luntras, and are designed to intensify the generation stage 
of mednatwn. The term 'secret m.mtru' is also utilised as a synonym for the Vehicle 
of Indestructible Reality ( Vuvuy.lnu). 
Mantrin sngags-pu 
An <ldcpt of the vehicle of secret muutr.z (m.mtray.zn,z) in general. However, the 
word ng.1kpu (sng.zgs-pa) is popularly used to denote those pra...:titioncrs of tautra 
who choose to ma1ntain a Lunily life, passing on their teachings through a familial 
lineage, in contrast to the celibate lite of a monk or nun. 
Mara hdud 
See under Malevolent I Beguiling Forces. 
Martial Hauming Spirits hts.m 
A class of ghostly or haunting spirits, often depicted as armour-clad, who cause 
colic and intestinal disorders. Foremost .unong them arc Tsimuru, the prote~o:tor of 
Samye monastery, .1nd )',mzslm ML~rfJo. They are generally depicted as red in colour, 
brandishing a red lance v-:ith J red tlag in the right hand ;tnd throwing J red-coloured 
snare (btsan-.:.hugs) with the left hand, while rid1ng a red horse. 
Means for Attainment sgrub-th,dJs, Skt. sddh,ma 
The literature of the Buddhist tautnzs is classified into tautra texts and means for 
att<linment manuals. The former are general expositions concerning the continua 
of the ground, path and result asso~i<Hed with a parti~o:ular ma~z4.zla of deities, while 
the Litter <He speciti~ manu.tls derived from and inspired by the former .1s the 
detailed means for attainment, or meditative realisation, of a spe~11ic mat.z4ala of 
deities. Such practi~es have four ph.1ses, whi~h are often known as the four aspects 
of ritual service and means for attainment (bsnycn-sgrub yan-lug b~hi). 
Meditation sgom, Skt. hh,zu,;n,z 
Med1t.1tion is defined as a disciplined mental process through whi~h a person 
cultivates familiarity with a chosen obje~o:t, be it an external object like an image, or 
even a trivial object su~h <lS a pebble, etc., or an internal obje~t su~h as one's o\vn 
mind or per~onal identity. According ro the sutras, there are two main types of 
meditation, one emphasising the faculty of stability and single-pointedness of mimi 
and the other emphasising <llulysis and dtscrimination. The first type of medit<Hion 
is absorptive, and produ~es a quality of menral placemenr and tranquillity, knmvn 
as calm abiding, and the latter, known as penetrative insight, generates a deeper 
in!'>ight into the profound n.ltures of the chosen object. In the context of the t,mtras, 
meditation additionally includes the te.:hniques of the generation and perfection 
stages, as well as those of the Great Perfection. 
Meditational Deity yi-d,mt, Skt. i~(adeuat,i 
forms or resonances of fully manifest buddhahood whose characteristics are dt'lined 
or reve.tled hy the o;pccitic r.mtric practices on the basis of \vhich they .ue visu.tlised. 
After receiving empowerment and guidan..:e concerning an appropriate meditational 
deity or mut.z4ula of deities from an authoritative spiritual teacher, the practitioner GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
of the tantras seeks to experientially cultivate union with the qualities of buddha­
body, speech and mind through the practice of the generation stage of meditation 
rebred to a specific medirarional deity or matJtJala of deities. It is essential that the 
meditarional deities should not be perceived as externally existing or independent 
beings but rather as forms or resonances of buddha-mind itself. Union with the 
meditarional deity is said to confer supreme accomplishment on the medirator, in 
contrast to meditation on the spiritual teacher, which confers blessings, and medi­
tation on the cjakini, which confers enlightened or buddha activities. 
Meditative Commitment thugs-dam 
This refers to a resolute paiod of meditative equipoise, and the commitments 
pertaining to meditative equipoise. Note that the same term is also used as the 
honorific equivalent of yz-dam (meditational deity). 
Meditative Concentration bsam-gtan, Skt. dhyana 
Meditative concentration is defined as the one-pointed abiding in an undisrracted 
state of mind free from the taint of dissonant mental states (klesa). It is an advanced 
form of calm abiding, where often both calm abiding and penetrative insight may 
be present in perfect union. In the sz:Uras and abhidhanna literature of the Lesser 
Vehicle, four states of meditative concentration are identified as being conducive to 
birth in the seventeen levels of the form realm. These arc characterised, in their 
proper order, by a temporary sojourn from: I) physical sensations of pain; 2) mental 
unhappine~s; 3) mental excitements related to pleasure; and 4) mundane experiences 
of joy as a whole. In rhc context of the Greater Vehicle, meditarive concentration is 
the fifth of the six perfections (Skr. ~a{{JJramita). 
Meditative Equipoise mnyam-par bzhag-pa, Skt. samahlta 
~leditative equipoise refers to a one-pointed placement of the mind on a meditation 
object or a theme, such as the selflessness of the individual personality (Skt. pudgala­
nazrJtmya) and the selflessness of phenomena (Skt. dlhlrm1.m,1irJtmya), which 
invariably occurs in the context of prolonged meditative stability (Skt. samadhi). It 
is contrasted with periods of post-meditation (Skt. p~~ta!.Jbdha, Tib. rjes-thob) 
during which the meditator arises from meditative equipoise, and engages with his 
or her environment. 
Meditative Stabiliry ting-nge- 'dzin, Skr. samadhi 
The Sanskrit term samadhi literally means 'union' or 'combination', and its Tibetan 
equivalent ting-nge- 'dzln means 'adhering to that which is profound ;tnd definitive'. 
Howncr, the term has several Jiffercnt meanings in different contexts. For example, 
in abhidhanna texts it sometimes refers to a mental factor that is pan of a group 
of mental factors present in every veridical cognition, whereas in the context of 
meditation, it can be synonymous with meditative concentration. In m<~ny in­
stances, samJdhi refers to specific meditative stares such as diamond-like medi­
tation, lion's mo1jestic pose meditation and others enumerated in the sutras and 
tantras of the Greater \'chide. !\tore specifically, in the Mahayoga tantras, the term 
meditative stability refers to the three phases of the generation and perfection 
stages of meditation. These arc: the meditative stability of reality (de-bzhin nyid-kyi 
ting-nge- 'd;;m), the meditative stability which illuminates all that appears (kun-tu 
snang-ba 'i tlng-nge- 'd;;ln ), and the meditative stability of the causal basis (rgyu'l 
tlng-nge- ·,t;;in), which respectively and sequentially focus on great emptiness, 
great compassion and the seals of the mcditational deities. In the Unsurpassed G L 0 S S A R Y 0 F K E Y T E R :-.1 S 
Yogatautras, somewhat different terminology is used in the contexts of the genera­
tion sta~e .llld the perfection stage. In the generation stage, the practice of the means 
of attainment rakes pl.Ke within the framework of (i) the initial meditative srahility 
(J.mg-po slryor-ha'i tilrg-11ge- 'chin), (1i) the meditative stability of the victonous rite 
of rhc ma~uJala (dkyrl-'khor rg;.·al-clwg-gi tillg-nge-'dzin), and (iii) the meditative 
~t.thdity of the VICtorious rite of enlightened activity (/as rgyul-chug-gr ting-nge­
'dzin). In the conrcxr of the perfection stage, however, these same terms refer roan 
advanced level of realisation. 
Mental Body yrd-lus, Skr. m.mok.iya 
The non-corporeal body assumed during the intermediate state of rebirth, which is 
said to have an initial similitude to the physical body of the previous life. See 
Chapter 1 1. 
Mental Factor sems-byrmg, Skt. caitasrku 
Sec Mind. 
Merit bsod-nums, Skt. puf!yu 
Merit refers to the whole~ome tendencies imprinted in the mind as a result of 
positive and skilful thoughts, words, and actions that ripen in the experience of 
happine~s and well-being. According to the Greater Vehicle, it is important to 
deJK.Ite the merit of one's wholesome actions to the benefit of all sentient beings, 
ensuring rhat others also experience rhe results of the positive actions generated. 
Middle Way Jbu-ma'i lam, Skt. 11ZLldhy.mraprutipad 
See Madhyamaka. 
Mind sems, Skt. cittc1 
In Buddhism, mind is defined as a dynamic process, which is simply the awareness 
of an obJect or event. In irs technical usage mind is contrasted with fifty-one mental 
factors, which are enumer.Hed in the abhidhan11a literature. In the context of this 
d1ffen:nti.Hion rhc prim.uy function of 'mind' is to be aware of the referent object 
as ;1 whole, whcreJs the modalities which relate to the specific aspects of the object 
are defined as 'mental factors'. It is importanr to understand rh.H mind in Buddhism 
.,hould not be conceived of as a static thing or as something composed of a spiritual 
sub•aance. Although some Buddhist philosophical schools of thought do identify 
mind as the essence of being or personal identity, the notion of self or person is not 
.1n e~senrial component of the Buddhist concept of mind. In the Dzogcheu teachings 
.1n Important distinction is made between the Tibetan terms 'sems' and 'rig-pa'. 
Here, our 'ordinJry mind' (sems) is the gross dualising consciousness (rnam-shes) 
whereas pure awareness (rig-pa) is free from the dualistic perceptions of subject and 
obJect. See Awareness, Intrinsic Awareness, and Consciousness. 
Mind of Enlightenment !Jyang-chub sems 
Sec Bodhicitta. 
Mindfulness drull-fJa, Skt. sm~ti 
Mindfulness is the faculty which enables the mind ro maintain its attention on a 
referent uhjecr, rhus allowing for the development of familiarity with the object and 
.1lso the ahiliry to retain its imprint within memory for future recollection. Together 
with menral alertness, it is one of the two indispensable mental factors for the 
development of calm abiding. It is mindfulness which counteracts rhe arising of GLOSSAKY Or KEY TEK~lS 491 
forgetfulness, and forgetfulness IS one of the greatest obsradcs to a successful 
wlrivation of meditative stability. 
Monastic Community Jge-'dun, Skr. sangha 
In its classical Buddhist usage, the term refers mainly to the spiritual communities 
of orda1ned practitioners, both monks and nuns (Skt. bhzk~u/ bhlk~ut.zi}. The actual 
s.mgh.1, v>hen viewed as an obJect of refuge in the context of the Three Precious 
Jewels, is a highly reahsed, 'supreme assembly' of those who have gained a direct 
insight into the true nature of reality, emptiness, i.e. those who have attained the 
path of insighr. 
Monastic Preceptor mkh.In-fJo, Skr. upddhydya 
The term monastic preceptor specifically indicates one who presides over the mon­
astic ordination ccremony of new monks. However, in some Tibetan traditions, the 
word 'khcnpo' (mkh,m-po) suggests an ordained professor of Buddhist philosophy, 
in which case it is equivalent to the term geshe (dge-shes) in its later usage. See 
Spiritual Friend. The same term can also be used to refer to the abbot of a monastery, 
in which case it often rakes the honorific form mkhan rin-po-che, the precious 
abbot. 
Monastic Vows sdom-pa, Skt. S.It~zvt~ru 
See Vows. 
Mother and Child Aspects of Reality chos-nyld ma-bu 
The 'mother' and 'child' aspects of reality arc those associated respectively with the 
inner radiance of the ground and the inner radiance of the path. Sec Inner Radiance. 
,\1otivational Tendencies 'du-byas, Skr. Sut?zsk.ira 
See Aggregate of .\1otivational Tendencies . 
. \1ount Gampodar sgum-po-gd.zr-gyz rl-bo 
~lount G.1mpod.1r in Dukfw is the treasure-site (gter-kha) from which the cyde of 
the Peaafitl and \Y/rathful Deitu~s: N,ztural Libcratzon through f Recognition off 
hzlzghtcned lnte11tlon (Lin-khro dgungs-pa r.Jng-gro/) was unearthed as treasure 
\gter-m,l) by Kamra Lingpa dunng the fourteenth century. Sec Gyurme Dorje's 
'Brief Literary H1story'. 
Mount Potalaka rz-ho po-ta-/,z-ka 
~lounr PotJ/ak,z, the abode of Avalokite5vara, is reputedly identified with a moun­
rain in modern Karnataka State, South India, according to the classical Indian 
Buddhist tradition. However, in the Chmese Buddhist tradition, it is identified with 
the eastern island of Putuo Shun in the hay of Hangzhou . 
. \1ount Sumeru rz-rab 
~lount Szmzeru is the axzs mundz of Indian cosmology, the centre of the world. In 
terms of the Hindu, Jain, Buddhist and Bon pilgrimage traditions, it is widely 
identified with the sacred Mount Kal/,zsh in far-west Tibet. See Four Continents 
and Eight Subconrincnts. 
Nagarjuna klu-sgrub 
A pre-eminent second-century AD Indian scholar and the founder of the Madlrya­
maka philosophical school of Buddhist thought. 492 G L 0 S S A R Y 0 F K E Y T E R :'\1 S 
Natural Expression r • .mg-bzhin, Skt. svabhava 
While the term svabhava conveys other meanings, such as self-identity and inherent 
existence in the contexts of Madhyamaka philosophy and sutra-based literature in 
general, here in the specific ternunology of the Nyingma school, it is rendered as 
'natural expression· because it describes the dynamic of the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource. As such, it is contrasted with the essence -the dynamic of the Buddha­
body of Reality, and compassionate energy- the dynamic of the Buddha-body of 
Emanation. The Buddha-body of Perfect Resource is said to be endowed with 
seven aspects of natural expression: I) ripening in the n<Hure of reality, 2) buddha 
attributes which are spontaneously present, 3) dimensionless pristine cognition, 4) 
intrinsic rather than external manifestation, 5) unqualified sameness, 6) freedom 
from single and multiple concepts, and 7) inseparability at all times. In the context 
of the present work, the term 'natural expression' also refers to the modalities of the 
twenty-eight wrathful/svarf, when contrasted with the 'natural purity' (g1tus-dag) of 
the peaceful deities and the 'natural transformation' (gnus-gyur) of the wrathful 
deities. 
Natural Liberation ru11g-grol 
According to the terminology of the Nyingma school and in the context of the title 
of our text Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: N,ltural Liberution through {Recugnitirm 
ofi Enlightened Intention (Zhi-khro dgongs-pa ra11g-grul) the term 'natural libera­
tion' refers to a natural process of recognition of the actual nature of the object, 
which is free from any form of renunciation or <lntidore. Dud1um Rmpoche expl.1ins 
the term 'natural liberation' (rung-gro[J to mean that recognition or awarene~~ is 
'uncontrived by any antidote, and all that arises is liberated without reference to 
other liberating activities'. This accomplishment is a distinctive feature of the rc~ult­
ant vehicles, such as Atiyoga. in contrast to the causal vehicles, in ,..,·hich the 
application of antidotes and renunciation arc reljuired. 
Natural Pristine Cognition ra11g-hyu11g ye-shes 
This term denotes the presence of intrinsic awareness which is pristine cognition as 
an uncultivated seed, said to abide a temporally in the mental continua of all semient 
beings. See Intrinsic Awareness and Pristine Cognition. 
Natural Purity gnas-su dag-palnzam-par d,lg-pa 
According to the terminology of the Nyittgma school and in the context of the 
present work, the term 'natural purity' refers to the quiescent naturally abiding 
purity of the psycho-physical aggregates, elemental properties, and sensory and 
mental processes as represented by the forty-two peaceful deities of the ma~ufala. 
'Natural purity' inJic<Hes the presence of the assembly of peaceful deities in the 
continuum of the ground. See Appendix Two. 
Natural Transformation g"as gyur-pa 
In contrast to the term 'natural purity', the term 'natural transformation' refers to 
the transformative energies of the fifty-eight wrathful deities of the ntt.l1.tcjala, which 
bring about the active transformation of the conditioned psycho-physical a~gre­
gates, elemental properties, and sensory and mental processes. 'Natural 
transformation' indicates the presence of the <.1ssembly of wrathful deities in the 
continuum of the ground. See Appendix Two. G L 0 S S A R Y 0 f K E Y T E R ~~ S 493 
Naturally Manifest r.znR-sn.mg 
In the terminology of the Nyingma school, the term 'naturally manifest' or 'intrinsi­
cally manifest' (rmzx-snanx) refers to the non-dual mode in which the natural 
radiance (r.mg-gsal) of pristine cognition (ye-shes) arises as intrinsic awareness 
(r.zng-rig). Sec Intrinsic Awareness. An important distinction is also made between 
rhe Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, which manifests naturally or inrrinsically, 
and the Buddha-body of Emanation, \vhich manifests extraneously (g::han-sn.znx), 
for the sake of sentient beings. 
Negativity sdig-pa, Skt. pap.z 
The negativity arising from the performance of non-virtuous past actions, which, 
along with negative ohscurations (sgrib) and their habitual tendencies (bag-chag), 
all have their basis in delusion, attachment, and aversion. Negativity, therefore, 
generates a momentum towards a less favourable rebirth within cyclic existence. 
New and Old/ Ancient Translation Schools gs,zr-ma-d,mg rnying-mu 
See N yingma. 
Nihilist chud-/t.;-h,zlmur-stug-f~<l, Skt. nai~!lnku 
Nihilism and etcrnalism arc the two extreme views which must, according to 
Buddhist thought, he transcended in order for any philosophical position to be 
considered well-founded. Nihilism in general refers to the view that denies the 
existence of objects, l.tws of cause and effect and the principle of dependent origina­
tion. However, based on one's metaphysical position with regard to the nature of 
reality. the criteria of what constiwres a dcn1al of the existence of phenomena or 
the law of cause and effect may differ. In ancient India the nihilist view was 
characteristic of the Caru.ik,z and B.irhasfJ.Jtya matcri.tlist schools. See Eternalist 
and Madhyamaka. 
Nine Sequences of the Vehicle theg-fhz'i rzm-pu dgu 
Sec under Nine Vehicles. 
Nine Vehicles theg-pa dg11, Skt. naz·.zy.uz.z 
In the Nyingma school, the BuJJhist te.t~.:hings are systematised Jccording to a 
hierarchy of the three outer or causJl vehicles (those of the pious attendants, hermit 
buddhas and bodhisaNvas), those of the three ourer classes of tantra (Kriyatantra, 
Ubhayatantra and Yogatantra), and those of the three inner classes of tantra 
(Mahayoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga). See the nine individual entries. 
Nirvar;ta mya11g-'das 
Nirvd~za (lit. 'state beyond sorrow') refers to the permanent cessation of all suffering 
and rhe dissonant mental states which cause and perpetuate suffering, along with 
all misapprehension with regard to rhe nJturc of emptiness (Skt. slln)·ut.:i). Nirva~zu 
is therefore the antithesis of cyclic existence (Skt. Su1?ZS.iru). Since it is through the 
misapprehension of the nature of actual reality (Skt. dh.zrnz.Jta) that our conscious 
stares of delusion arise, a total elimination of these dissonant mental states can only 
be effected by generating a genuine insight into the true nature of actual reality. All 
the bodhisaNva paths expounded in rhc st:Uras and all the aspects of the continuum 
of the path which are expounded in the tantras arc regarded as the means by which 
nirv,i~zu might be attained. Classical Buddhist literature mentions three types of 
nirvJ,_zu: 1) nirua~zu with resiJue, i.e. the initial state of nirl'd1_1a when the person is 
still dependent on his or her karmically conditioned psy..:ho-physical aggregates 494 GLOSSARY Of KEY TERMS 
(skundhu); .z.) mn•,il_tu without residue, i.e. <ln advanced state of nirvlif!u where the 
former aggregates have also bt.'en consumed within emptiness; and 3) non-ab1ding 
nirv.i~za, i.e. a· state that has transcended both the extremes of conditioned cyclic 
existence and also the isolated peace or quiescence of nirv.i~zu. 
Non-virtuous Action mi-dgc-lhz, Skt. ukus.1la 
Sec Virtuous Action. 
Nucleus of the Sugataffathagata hde-gshegs snying-po I dc-gshegs snying-pu, Skt. 
sugut.zg.Jrbhalt.JthJg.Jt,zg.Jrbh.J 
Both Sugat.l (One Who Has Gone to Bli~~) and TathJg,zta (One Who Ha!> Thus 
Gone) arc epithets of Buddha. However, the expression 'nucleus of the sugat.z' or 
'nucleus of the t.zth.ig,l!a' refers to the Sl'ed of buddha nature present bur unculti­
vated m the mental continuum of all sentient beings, and without ,.,hich the att.lin­
ment of enlightenment or buddhahood would be impossible. Sec Buddha nature. 
Nyinda Choje nyin-z/,z chos-rJc 
The name of the son of Kanna Lingpa. See Gyurme Doric's 'Brief Literary History'. 
Nyinda 01.er nyiu-z/.z 'od-zer 
The name of a second-generation lineage-holder of Kanna Lingpa. See Gyurme 
Doric's 'Brief Literary History'. 
Nyingma nzying-mu 
The oldest school of Tibet.m Buddhism, based on the teaching traditions <1nd 
texts introduced to Tibet during the c3rliest phase of Buddhist prop<1garion, which 
coincided with the reigns of the Buddhist kings of the Yarlwzg dynasty in the eighth 
to ninth centuries. These tr.1ditions were introduced from India by Padma­
sambhava, Vim.z/,zmitr,z and others, and m<lintaincd in Tiber by the twenty-five 
disciples of l'admasambhava. The distinction between the old and new schools of 
Tibetan Buddhism is made on the basis of the interregnum which followed the 
persecution of Buddhism during the ninth century and preceded the second or later 
phase of Buddhi.,t prop.1gation when a further corpus of Buddhist literature was 
introduced from India by 1\l.zrp.z, Drokmi LotsJw.z, Atis,z, Rinchen Zan!(J}() and 
others during the eleventh century. Lineages derived from the earlier phase and 
works translated before the interregnum are known as Nymgma, or the 'Ancient 
Translation school', in contrast to those which emerged thereafter and are known 
as S.1rma, or the 'New Tran~lation ~chools'. 
Nyingthig snying-thig 
The teachings known as the 'Innermost Spirituality' or 'Heart-Essence' (snying-thig) 
are the most important and essential pith instructions within the esoteric ino;truc­
tional class (up.zde5ul'<Zrgu) of Atiyoga, including the techniques of Cutting through 
Resistance and All-surpassing Realisation. Two distinct lineages of these teachings 
were introduced from India by Padmasambhava <1nd Vtmalamitra, and then trans­
mmed \l."ith great secrecy in Tibet until the time of Longchen Rabjampa (fourteenth 
century), who integratt·d them in his four-p.zrt Innermost Spirztualtty (sNymg-thig 
ya-hzhi), from which time they were widely disseminated and practised. D1verse 
traditions of Ny111gthig .ue pr<Ktised within the treasure (gter-m,z) traditions of the 
Nyingmu school, the most influenti.ll in more recent times being the l1111ermost 
SJiirztu,zlzty ol l.ongchcnJhl (K/cmg-cheu snyi11.~-thi!(), wh1ch was reve.1lcd during 
the eighteenth century by Rigd::.in }tgnze Lin!(JII.l on the b.1sis of his inspirauonal GLOSSARY Of KEY TERMS 495 
visions of Lmz~choz R.lhJ.mzpa, and whi.:h has since be.:ome the most popular 
recension of j\;ymgthig teachings throughout Tibet. 
Oath-bound Protectors d.Jm-c,;n 
A class of protectors of the sacred teachings who are considered ro have been 
originally indi~cnous Tibetan spirits, bound under an oath of allegiance ro Buddhism 
by Padmasambhava during the eighth century. 
Obscuration sgrib-pa, Skr. az,ara~z,; 
There are two main categories of obscurations (sgrib-pa), namely: the dissonant 
mental states (nyon-sgnh, Skr. klesiiuar.J~za) which arc the obscurations ro liberation, 
and the subtle propensities of these mental states as well as that of fundamental 
ignorance, which constitute the obscurations to omniscience (shes-sgrib, Skt. jfzeya­
v,zra~z.l). As the terms themselves indicate, the first category of obscurarions obstruct 
the individual from gaining total freedom from karmically conditioned cyclic exist­
ence, and the latter from attaining a direct and non-deceptive realisation of all 
aspects of reality. The obscurations to liberation include not only the conscious 
stares of our deluded mind, such as desire, hatred, jealousy, harmful intent, ere., 
bur also the psychological habitual tendencies which are imprinted by these stares, 
which serve as seeds for their continuity and recurrence. The second category 
of obscurations refers to rhe 'propensities for bewildering dualistic appearance' 
(gnyis-snang khru/-p,; ·; hJg-ch,;gs), the subtle dispositions and latent tendencies 
which are deeply ingrained within an individual's psyche and which arc the origins 
of our dualistic perceptions of the phenomenal world and of our own consciousness. 
A total ovcn:oming of both obscurations (Tib. sgrib-gnyis) marks the attainment of 
buddhahood. 
Obstacle-causing Spirits b,;r-cad-kyi gdon 
The various classes of spirits (gdon) who cause obstacles to individuals and pollute 
the environment, which are said ro impede certain localities, the physical body and 
human activities. In particular, there is an enumeration of eighteen such spirits to 
whom paediatric Jisea~es are attributed by the Tibetan medical tradition. 
Obstructing Forces bgegs, Skt. viglma 
A class of forces which obstruct spiritual practice, but whose obstacles may be 
cons1dered psychologically as cathartic in that their emergence may suggest that 
one's own negative past actions are ripening and therefore their negative impact is 
finally maturing and coming to an end. Often when means for attainment are 
performed in accordance with the tantras, a forma-offering is dedicated ro such 
obstructing forces prior to the commenccmenr of the generation stage of meditation. 
O<:J<:Jiyana o-rgyan 
Oqqiyana, the birthplace of Padmasambhava, is the name of an ;mcient kingdom, 
probably situated in the remote north-west of the Indian subcontinent, where a 
large corpus of ranrric literature is ~aid to have been propagated in the human world 
for the first rime. The land of Oq~fiyJna is associated with a number of great 
accomplished masters (siddha), including Padmasambhava, Kambala{Jtida, and 
l.ilavajra in particular. On the basis of traditional Tibetan pilgrimage accounts, 
such as that written by Orgyenpa Rinchenpel, modern writers identify OqqiyJn,; 
as having been in the region of the Swat valley in Pakistan. The Tibetan form of 
OqqiyJna, Orgyen, is also by extension a name for Padmasa.mbhava himself. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Offering mchod-pa, Skt. puja 
In a Buddhist context, this refers to offerings made to the meditational deity, the 
spiritual teacher or other appropriate objects of veneration. In general, there are 
offerings associated with body, speech and mind. Thus, an offering can be of 
material substance such as flowers, scented water and food, or a verbal offering, 
such as the recitation of songs of praise, or a mental offering, such as the offering 
of the positive potentials which one may have accumulated as a result of having 
engaged in wholesome deeds beneficial to others. More specifically, the tantras 
identify four kinds of offering which are to be made, namely, outer, inner, secret 
and definitive offerings. The outer offerings of enjoyment (phyi nyer-spyod-kyi 
mchod-pa) are the eight associated with the eight offering goddesses, including 
water for the mouth, water for the feet, flowers, incense, light, perfume, food, and 
sound, as well as song, dance, and meditation. Inner offerings of commitment (nang 
dam-rdzas-kyi mchod-pa) refer to the pure essences of semen, blood and flesh, 
transformed through the yoga of the energy channels, currents and seminal points 
within the subtle body. Secret offerings arc those of sexual union and 'liberation' 
(gsang-ha sbyor-sgrol-gyi mchod-pa) related to the esoteric rites and practices which 
transform the five poisons into the five pristine cognitions, and definitive offerings 
are those of great sameness (de-kho-na-nyid mnyam-pa chen-po'i mchod-pa), 
namely the union of bliss and emptiness. 
Omniscience thams-cad mkhyen-pa-nyid, Skt. sarvajiiata 
In a Buddhist context the word is reserved only for the all-knowing pristine cognition 
of the buddhas. Although the original Sanskrit and Tibetan terms, like their English 
equivalent, do carry with them the literal connotation of all-knowingness, the 
principal meaning of the term should be understood in terms of a direct and 
simultaneous perception of the dual aspects of reality, i.e. of the phenomenal aspects 
(valid only within the relative framework of our ordinary perceptions) and their 
ultimate nature, emptiness. In other words the term refers primarily to a non­
conceptual simultaneous perception of the two truths within a single mental act. 
One-day Vows hsnyen-gnas-kyi sdom-pa, Skt. upavtlsasa'?"vara 
Sec Pratimok~a and Vows. 
Pacification zhi-ba'i las, Skt. santikriya 
See under Four Aspects of Enlightened Activity. 
Padma Family padma'i rigs, Skt. padmakula 
One of the five enlightened families (paiicakula) into which the meditational deities 
of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource are subdivided. The deities of the Padma 
family include the peaceful buddhas Amitabha and Pa1.u!aravJsinl, and the corre­
sponding wrathful aspects Padma Heruka and Padmakrodhesvarf. See Appendix 
Two. 
Padmakara padma'i 'byung-gnas 
See Padmasambhava. 
Padmasambhava, padma sam-bha-va 
Padmasambhava, also generally known as Guru Rinpoche and Padmakara, is 
revered as the master from Otf4iyana who, along with Santarak~ita and King 
Trismrg Detsen, formally established Buddhism in Tibet during the eighth century. 
In particular, he is renowned for his suppression and conversion of malevolent G L 0 ~ S A R Y 0 F K E Y T E R 1\1 S 497 
spirits and hostile non-Buddhist forces, as well as for introducing to Tibet many 
oral transmissions and texts of Mahayoga and Atiyoga, including the teachings 
contained in our text, the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities: Natural Liberation 
through f Recognition of] l:nlightened Intention (Zhi-khro dgmzgs-pa rang-grol). 
To practitioners of the Nyingma school, and all those who follow the practices of 
the Nyingma lineages, h~ is revered as a 'second buddha', and there are many 
systems of meditation based on the visualisation of his rainbow-like form. Tibetan 
literature contains a number of biographical accounts, which describe his life in the 
form of eight or twelve different manifestations. See Gyurme Dorje's 'Brief Literary 
History'. 
Palace pho-lm.mg/gzhul-yas-khang, Skt. vimJna 
Sec under Mal)<)ala. 
Paradise :.hings-kh,zms, Skt. huddhak~etra 
Sec Buddha Field. 
Past Actions /,zs, Skt. karm,z 
The technical term 'k,zrm.z' refers to the dynamic relationship between actions and 
their consequences. It includes in its causal aspect both the actual actions (physical, 
verbal and mental) and the psychological imprints and tendem:ies created within 
the minJ by such actions. After the performance of an action a causal chain is 
maintained within the mental continuum which continues through the presem and 
successive rebirths. Such a karmic potential is activated when it interacts with 
appropriate circumstances and conditions, thus leading to the fruition of its effects. 
This dynamic of p<lSt actions has two main features: 1) one never experiences the 
consequences of an action not committed; and 2) the potential of an action once 
committed is never lost unless obviated by specific remedies. It is also worth bearing 
in mind that the idea of 'past actions' in Buddhism cannot not be equated with the 
notion of causality as understood in a stri~.:rly deterministic sense. 
Path fum, Skt. mJrg.z 
The means of spiritual practice (view, meditation, conduct and so forth) by which 
the rcsultJnt goal of any of the nine vehicles might be attained. 
Peaceful and Wrathful Deities zhi-khro 
Sec Appendix Two. 
Penetrative Insight !IJdg-mthcmg, Skt. vipasyan,z 
This is an analytical meditative state, penetrating the nature, characteristics or 
function of the chosen object of meditation, which is accompanied by physical and 
mental suppleness and generated on the basis of mental tranquillity or calm abiding. 
The object of such an insight can be mundane, such as the topics of impermanence 
and suffering, or supramundane, such as emptiness, the ultimate nature of reality. 
This 'penetrative insight' can be attained only in union with calm abiding, and 
many meditation manuals state that the realisation of 'calm abiding' is an essential 
prerequisite for the cultivation of 'penetrative insight'. However, in Unsurpassed 
Yogatantra there exist advanced techniques which enable practitioners to attain 
'calm abiding' and 'penetrative insight' simultaneously. 
Perception 'dtt-shcs, Skt. s.z1~f1id 
Sec under Aggregate of Perceptions. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Perfection of Discriminative Awareness sher-phyin, Skt. praif!.ipt.irumitii 
Often translated also as 'perfc~tion of wisdom', the Sanskrit word prai11iipt.iramitii 
rders to the sixth of the six perfections (Skt. ~afpt.lramitd) which are cultivated by 
bodhisattvas. The term 'pcrfcl.:tion of discrimmative awareness' has three different 
applications: firstly, it may refer to the resultant, perfected dis~riminative awareness 
( 'bras-bu sher-phyirt) of a buddha, which IS totally non-dual, free of all obscurations, 
and perceives spontaneously in a single mental act the dual aspects of all phenomena. 
Sec Two Truths. Secondly, it may refer to the bodhisattva paths which lead ro the 
above perfection of dis~riminauve awareness (lam sher-phyin), blending together at 
the most profound level the discriminative awareness of emptiness (siinyutJ) and 
the skilful means of great compassion (mahakanu.z.i). Thirdly, it may denote the 
literature of the Pr,lpidpJrumztJ subdivision of the sutras of the Greater Vehicle, 
which outline the essential aspects of those paths and results (gzhzmg sher-phyin). 
Iconographically, Praf1i,ifJ.iramitJ is depicted in the form of a female meditational 
deity and the Sanskrit sutras themselves are invariably entitled Transcendent Lady 
who is the Per(edion of Discrimmatil'e Awareness (Bhagavatipra;,;aparamitii). See 
also under Discriminative Awareness. 
Perfection Stage rdzogs-rim, Skt. sampamzakruma 
Following the meditative generation of the form of the meditational deity and an 
approximation of the pristine cognition of the meditational deity during the genera­
tion stage (Skt. utpattikrama), the perfection stage employs tc~hni4ucs for control­
ling the energy channels, vital energies and seminal points within the practitioner's 
transmuted body. The purpose is to make manifest the inner radiance induced by 
the ever-deepening realisation of the four kinds of emptiness or 'dissolution stages' 
and of the coemergent pristine cognition induced by the four delights. The factor 
that marks the transition from generation stage to perfection stage is the yogin's 
ability to draw the vital energies (Skt. vt.lyu) into the central channel. See also Great 
Perfection. 
Perfe~tions fJha-rol-du f'hyin-pa 
Sec under Six Perfections. 
Pious Attendant nyan-thos, Skr. srJz•,1ka 
The practitioners of the Lesser Vehicle (hinayana) include both pious attendants 
and hermit buddhas (Skt. pratyekalmddha). The primary differences between them 
arc the fo(US and modalities of their pra(ticc on the path towJrds liberation from 
cyclic existence. The pious attendant places greater emphasis on destroying the 
mistaken belief in personal identity (pudga/a) by overcoming the primary and 
second<~ry dissonant mental states, while the hermit buddha additionally comes to 
realise that objective phenomena are devoid of inherent existence. Characteristically, 
the pious attendants depend on oral instructions when both receiving tea(hings and 
when giving guidance to others on the path. See Hermit Buddha. 
Posture of the Bodhisattvas sems-dpa 'i skyil-knmg, Skt. sattvapary,uika 
Also known as the posture of royal case (mahariiialilasana), this is the posture in 
which seated male and female bodhisattvas are commonly depicted iconograph­
Ically or visualised in meditation in which the right leg is extended and the left leg 
drawn in. The extended right leg and foot symbolises the abandonment of all 
negative defects, and the drawn in left leg symbolizes the deity's understanding 
.md (Uitiv.uion of all positive attributes. As the combined purity of the deity's GLO~SAHY Of KEY TER~S 499 
compassionate skilful means (extended right leg) and discriminative awareness 
(dr.1wn in left leg), this posture also represents the abandonment of the two extremes 
of cyclic existence and niroat;a. 
Posture of the Lion sc11g-gc ·; 'dug-st . .mgs. Skr. si1~:hjs,.ma 
The posture of the lion i~ the posture assumed by Silkyamuni Buddha at the time 
of hts passing, lying on the right stJe wnh his right arm bent at the elbow and his 
palm supporting the heaJ. 
Posture of Royal Ease r,I.,')'..Jl-chcn rol-pa 'z skyil-krung, Skr. m.;hJrJJulil.lsan.J 
See under Posture of the Bodhisattvas. 
Power stobs, Skr. b.1la 
In general, spiritu.1l power is dassitied, along with discriminative awareness and 
compassion, as one of the three principal attributes to be cultivated by bodhisaNt•as, 
symbolised in this case by the form of the BodhisaNva Vajrapat;i. More specifically, 
boJhisaNvas cultivate ten spiritual powers (d.Js.Jhula) with respect to their reflec­
tions, higher aspirations, practice, discriminative awareness, aspirationill prayers, 
diverse vehicles, modes of condw.:t, emanational abilities, enlightenment, and teach­
ing of the sacred doctrine. Distinct from these are the so-called ten powers of the 
buddhas (d.Js.Jt.JthJ~Jtubula), which are all inc..:luded among the categories of 
buddha attributes. Buddhas arc said to be endowed with spiritual power because 
they have: (i) the power of knowing the positive ilnd negative comingcncies of all 
things, (ii) the power of knowing the maturation of past actions, (iii) the power of 
knowing diverse volitions, (iv) the power of knowing diverse sensory spectra, (v) 
the power of knowing those who arc of supreme ability and those who arc not, (vi) 
the power of knowing all spiritual paths -wherever they lead, (vii) the power of 
omniscience with respect to meditative concentration, liberation, meditative stab­
ility, meditative equipoise, ilnd puriflcatton of dissonant mental states, (viii) the 
power of recollecting past abodes, (ix) the power of knowing where consciousness 
is tr.msferred at the time of death and rebirth, and (x) the power of knowing that 
the entire flow of corrupt past actions has cc.1scd. 
Prahcvajra dg.J '-r.Jh rdo-rie 
~lore commonly known in the Tibet.m form G.1rab Durie, Pr.Jhcr1ufru is regarded 
as the first human lineage holder of Atiyoga. 
Prasangika thul-'gyur-ba 
Sec Madhyamaka. 
Pratimok~a so-sor thar-pu 
An individual's practice of ethical discipline which acts as a firm foundation ior the 
aspirant's spiritual endeavour whilst on the path towards the attainment of libera­
tion from cycli..: existence. There are eight types of pr.ltimok~a vows: 1) one-day 
vows (Skt. upuvasalupavdsi), a lay person's vow of abstinence, taken only for a 
twenty-four hour period, from killing, sexual misconduct, stealing, lying, alcohol, 
frivolous activities, caring after lunch, and using high scats or beds; 2-.3) the five 
vows of a lay man and a lay woman (Skt. upasukul updsikJ) which are not to kill, 
lie, steal, be intoxi..:ated, or commit sexual mis..:onduct; 4-5) the vows of the novice 
monk and novi..:e nun (Skt. srJmu~:era/ srama~renka); 6) the vows of a probatiOnary 
nun (Skt. siksam.it;u); 7) the 253 vows of a fully ordained monk (Skr. hiJJk~u); and 
8) the .3 64 vows maintained by fully ordained nuns (Skr. hhiksu~:i). Pr.itmwk~a soo GLOSSARY OF KEY TER:V1S 
literally means 'individual liberation', or the initial stage of release from the irnplus­
ive force of non-virtuous habits. 'l'rdt1' means 'individually' or 'first', and 'nwk~a', 
'release', 'freedom', or 'liberation'. SL"c also under Vows. 
Preceptor mkhmz-po, Skt. upadhyJya 
See Monastic Preceptor. 
Precious Jewels dkon-mchog, Skr. rat11a 
See under Three Precious Jewels. 
Preliminary Practices sngmz-'gro 
The preliminary practices arc thosl.' undcrt.tkl'n by an aspiring practitioner of thl.' 
tantras, prior to engaging in the main practices of the generation and perfection 
stages of meditation. There are both outer, or common, preliminaril.'s, and inner, 
or uncommon, preliminaries. The former are the four analytical meditations which 
turn the mind of the practitioner away from worldly distractions and towards the 
sacred teachings, namely those focusing: on the nature of the precious opportunities 
afforded by human birth; on death and impermanence (anity,l); on the dynamics of 
past actions (karma) and their consequences; and on the sufferings of being~ within 
cyclic existence (Sut?ISJra). The latter are the five purificatory pr<tctices, each of 
which is performed one hundred thousand times, namely: the taking of refuge in 
the Three Precious Jewels, in conjunction with the act of prostration (which purifies 
pride); the cultivation of the altruistic intention to attain enlightenment for the sake 
of others, in conjunction with the recitation of the appropriate verses (which purifies 
envy and mundane ambition); the recitation of Vajrasattva's Hundred-syllable 
Mantra (which purifies aversion); the offering of the matJc.tala (which purifies 
attachment); and the cultivation of union with the enlightened attributes of the 
spiritual teacher {guruyog<I}, in conjunction with the appropriate mantra recitation 
(which purifies delusion). Sec Ch.tpters 1 and 2. 
Primordial Purity ka-dag 
See Spontaneous Presence. 
Pristine Cognition ye-shes, Skt. f1IJ11J 
The modality of buddha-mind. Although all sentient beings possess the potential 
for actualising pristine cognition within their mental continuum, the psychological 
confusions and deluded tendenCies which defile the mind obstruct the natur.tl 
expression of these inherent potentials, making them appear instead as aspects of 
mundane consciousness (viji!Jil<I). BudJI11st literature mentions five types of pnstine 
cognition which arc the quintessential perfected states of our own mental faculties 
and which are identified with the five male buddhas of the mm.uf.t~la of Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities. Sec Appendix Two. The pristine cognition of reality's expanse 
(dharmadhJtujfwna) is the natural purity of the aggregate of consciousness, free 
from delusion; the mirror-like pristine cognition (ddars.JjfzJIIi.l) is the mind to which 
all the objects of the five senses appear spontaneously as in a mirror, it is the 
natural purity of the aggregate of form, free from aversion; the pristine cogniloinn 
of sameness (samatdftiJna) is the mind that experiences the three different types of 
feelings (good, bad and indifferent) as of one taste, it is the natural purity of 
the aggregate of feeling, free from pride; the pristine cognition of discernment 
(pratyavek~al.l<ljtlii1Za) is the mind that accurately identities names and forms, it is 
the natural purity of the aggregate of perceptions, free from attachment; and the GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 501 
pristine cognition of accomplishment (k~tyup,lsthanajfiana) is the mind that accords 
with awakened activities and their purposes, it is the natural purity of the aggregate 
of motivational tendencies, free from envy and self-centred ambition. 
Propensities bag-chags, Skt. vJs,.mJ 
Sec Habitual Tendencies. 
Prostration phyag-'tshal-ba 
A common gesture of reverence in the practice of Tibetan Buddhism. During the 
preliminary practices (sngrm-'gro) of the tatttras, the act of paying homage through 
prostration is undertaken, in conjunction with the recitation of the prayer of refuge, 
as a means of reducing and eliminating pride. 
Protectors of the [Sacred] Teachings chus-skyunglsrung-ma, Skt. dharmupJ/a 
There arc two main categories of protectors: r) supramundane protectors, such as 
Mahakala, Ekaja~f, DorJe l.ekpa, and RJhu/a, who arc the wrathful manifestations 
of enlightened beings; and 2) worldly protectors, many of whom were originally 
malevolent forces who were subdued by accomplished masters such as Padma­
sambhava and then assigned to protect the teachings. In both cases their activity is 
to protect the sacred teachings and its sincere practitioners from obstacles. 
Provisional Meaning drang-don, Skt. neyartha 
See under Definitive Meaning. 
Pure Illusory Body dug-pa 'i sgyu-lus 
See Illusory Body. 
Pure Realm 
See Buddha Field. 
Pure Realm of the Sky-farcrs d.1g-pu ·, mkha ·-spyod-kyi zhing, Skt. khecarik~etra 
The pure realm or fields of the sky-farers represents the level on which the awareness­
holders (v1dyJdharu) are said to abide. 
Pure Vision/Perception dug-pu 'i snang-ba 
In the terminology of the Nyingma school, the expression 'pure vision' frequently 
refers to a type of revelation, through which meditational deities or accomplished 
masters of the past appear in a vision to impart their teachings. This mode of pure 
vision, therefore, has some affinity with the revelations of the treasures (gter-mu). 
More generally, 'pure vision' denotes the purity of perception of meditational 
deities, symbolically represented by their respective ma~Jc!alas, which is cultivated 
in the generation stage of meditation. However, the Tibetan equivalent dug-pa'i 
snung-bu is also used colloquially to mean a 'positive perspective' or 'positive 
outlook' on life. 
Purification sbyrmg-ba, Skt. sodhuna 
The verb 'to purify' has two distinct meanings in a Buddhist context. firstly, 
purification can refer simply to the purification of non-virtuous habits or dissonant 
mental states, ere., in which the objects of purification arc, without qualification, 
totally eradicated from one's mental continuum. In the second meaning, which 
arises more in the context of tantra, the term 'purification' has rather different 
implications. Here, the significance of the word is understood in terms of transmuta­
tion from an impure, polluted state into an unstained, purified state. This process GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
is exemplified by the practices related to G.lrrying the Three Buddhu-hodies un to 
the Path (sKu-gsum lam-'khyer). In this context, the phases of ordinary death, 
intermediate state, and rebirth when experienced choicelessly as a result of one's 
past actions, are the bases of purification. The meditations on the Three Buddha­
bodies arc the purifying paths and the accomplishments of the Buddha-body of 
Reality, the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource, and the Buddha-body of Emanation 
arc the purified results. 
Purification of the Lower Realms ngan-sung sbyong-ba, Skt. durgutiparisodhana 
This is the Tantra of the Puri{ic.ztion of the Lower Re.zlms (Sarvadurgutipari­
sodhan.zt.J1ltra), which is recited to assist the deceased in avoiding the pitfalls of 
rebirth as a sentient being trapped in the three lower existences. 
Quiescence zln-ha, Skt. santi 
This is a synonym for the quiescent state of nin'dfJa, in which all dissonant mental 
states and misconceptions concerning actual reality have ended, and rebirth in cyclic 
existence no longer occurs. As such, it is the antithesis of the rebirth process 
(srid-pa). Sec also under nirva~a. 
Rainbow Light I Body J ·;a '-Ius 
The appearance of rainbow light at the time of death is indicative of the deceased's 
adeptness in the practices of the Great Perfection (rdzogs-fJa chen-po) or in certain 
other perfection stage practices. There arc many incidents recorded in Tibetan 
biographical literature concerning the attainment of the rainbow-light body at the 
time of death. On occasions when this attainment is residual, the physical body will 
shrink dramatically or vanish into light, leaving only the hair or fingernails of the 
deceased's physical form behind. However, when there is no residue, the entire 
physical form will vanish into light. In these latter cases, the body of rainbow 
light ('1.z'-lus) or body of light ('od-kyi sku) is equivalent to the attainment of the 
Buddha-body of Great Transformation (Skt. m.zhasa~kra11tikJya, Tib. 'pho-b.z 
chen-fJo 'i sku). Sec Buddha-body. 
Ratna Family rin-chen rigs, Skt. ratnakula 
One of the five enlightened families (pancakula) into which the meditational deities 
of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource are subdivided. The deities of the Ratna 
family include the peaceful buddhas R.Jtnas.zmhhava and Mamaki and the corre­
sponding wrathful aspects Ratna Heruka and R.ztn,zkrodhesv.zri. See Appendix Two. 
Realisation rtogs-pa, Skt. adhig.Jma 
This refers to the spiritual experiences that a praditioner gains through insight into 
and transformation of the mental continuum whilst on the path to enlightenment, 
and to the resultant attainment of liberation or buddhahood. 
Reality chos-n)•id, Skt. dharmata 
In our text the term 'reality' has been used interchangeably with 'actual reality'. See 
Actual Reality. 
Reality's Expanse chos-dbyings, Skt. dharnzadhatu 
Sec Expanse of [Actual] Reality. 
Refuge sky.zhs-'gro, Skt. saru1Jagamana 
This term in Buddhist usage indicates the act of entrusting one's spiritual growth 
and well-being to the Three Precious Jewels. The Three Precious Jewels arc the G l 0 S SA R Y 0 F K E Y T E R .\-1 S 
objects of refuge, and the nature of the refuge sought from each of the three 
differs. In the Buddha, the fully enlightened reacher, guidance on a correct path to 
buddahood is sought; in the sacred teachings, the realisations of the path arc sought; 
and in the monastidsupreme community (sangha) perfect companionship on the 
path to buddhahood is sought. The successful taking of refuge in the Three Precious 
Jewels requires the following two conditions: a) a genuine anxiety in the face of the 
potential for future suffering and b) a genuine confidence in the capacity of the 
Three Precious Jewels to offer protection from these potential sufferings. In the 
context of our text, the act of going for refuge constitutes the first of the five 
uncommon preliminary practices (thun-min sngon-'gro). Here, the three levels of 
refuge are recognised: the outer refuge (phyi'i skyabs-'gro), which is taken in the 
Buddha, the sacred teachings and the monastic community; the inner refuge (nang-gi 
sky.1bs-'gro ), which is taken in the spiritual teacher, the meditation a! deity and 
the tJakini and the secret refuge (gsang-ha'i skyahs-'gro), which is taken in the 
Buddha-body of Reality, the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource and the Buddha­
body of Emanation. 
Relative Truth kun-rdzoh bden-pa, Skt. samurtisatya 
See under Two Truths. 
Relics gdunglring-srel 
See under Bone Relics. 
Renunciation nges-'byunglspang-ba, Skt. nai~kramyalpruhar:a 
The English term renunciation translates both the Tibetan terms nges-'hyung and 
spmzg-hu. In the former sense, renunciation refers to Sakyamuni Buddha's renunci­
ation of the household life and it is defined as a mental attitude free from impulsive 
clinging to all worldly attributes such as wealth, fame, position and the thought of 
a favourable rebirth in a future life. It is only on the basis of such an attitude that 
the practitioner can spontaneously generate a genuine wish to be free from cyclic 
existence. Hence the real meaning of renunciation lies not just in mere physical 
separation from objects of desire but more importantly in a quality of mental 
liberation which is free from even the slightest degree of craving for mundane values. 
The Tibetan word nges-'hyung literally means a 'definite emergence', indicating a 
definite emergence from the bonds of our normally narrow-minded attachment to 
worldly pleasures. In the latter sense (Skt. prahar:a), renunciation refers to the four 
correct trainings which arc included among the thirty-seven aspects of the path to 
enlightenment (bodhipak~ikadharma) cultivated by those aspiring to enlightenment, 
namely: 1) to not develop non-virtuous actions which have not arisen, 2) to renounce 
non-virtuous actions which have arisen, 3) to develop virtuous actions which have 
not arisen, and 4) to not renounce virtuous actions which have arisen. 
Rinpoche rin-po-che 
This term literally means 'high in value or esteem', and in ordinary language 
indicates a precious jewel. By extension, in Tibetan Buddhism, the term has come 
to refer to an incarnate master who is 'high in value' or 'most precious'. Accordingly, 
the title 'Rinpoche' is widely used by Tibetans to refer to any incarnate spiritual 
teacher. Sec Tulku. 
Rite for Affirmation of Vows 'bogs-chug 
The rite for the affirmation of vows is that through which the ability to fulfil GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
and restore impaired commitments taken in association with the tantras is trans­
ferred. 
Rites of Enrichment, Pacification, Subjugation and Wrath zhi rgyas d/Jang drag-gi 
las 
See Four Aspects of Enlightened Activity. 
Rites of 'Liberation' sgrol-ba 
The rites of 'liberation' refers to practices, only to be applied by accomplished 
masters who have attained proficiency in consciousness transference, which end the 
life of a hostile being who is wholly intent on vicious negative activities. The 
consciousness of the harmful being is compassionately transferred to a realm of 
higher rebirth thus freeing him or her from the inevitable consequences of their 
future and past actions. . 
Ritual Officiant las-mkhan, Skt. karmdcarya 
The ritual officiant is the one who leads the students into the presence of a spiritual 
teacher at the rime when empowerment is conferred, covering the students' eyes 
with a red blindfold and placing a flower and a vajra in their hands. 
Ritual Service bsnyen-pa, Skt. seva 
See Four Aspects of Ritual Service and Means for Attainment. 
Rosary phreng-ba, Skt. mala 
The Tibetan rosary generally has one hundred and eight beads, and is used for the 
counting of mantra recitations. 
Rudra ru-dra 
As expounded, for example, in the Szura which Cathers All Intentions (mDu 
dgongs-pa 'dus-pa) and later treasure (gter-tna) revelations as well, Rudra is the 
embodiment of rampant egohood, a being who assumed a powerful malevolent 
form, having misapplied the practice of the tantras in a previous life, and who 
was consequently subdued by the wrathful means of the buddhas Hayagriva or 
Mabottara Heruka. The metaphor illustrates the origins of the outer attributes of 
the wrathful deities, who are in essence the peaceful deities, but who adopted the 
outer terrifying characteristics of Rudra in order to actively confront deep-seated 
egohood. The metaphor illustrates that the wrathful deities represent the spon­
taneous process of transformation of the outer deluded state to its actual or enlight­
ened nature. 
Sacred Substances rdzas, Skt. dravya 
According to the tantras, ritual substances or anicles are employed in order to 
symbolise the bond between the practitioner and the meditational deity and in some 
cases these actually symbolise the mcditational deities or their attributes. In the 
context of an empowerment ceremony, symbolic implements, such as the vajra and 
bell, or diadem, vase and so on are known as sacred substances of empowerment 
(dhang-rdzas). 
[Sacred] Teachings fdam-pa'ij chos, Skt. {sad/dharma 
The Sanskrit term dharma carries a very broad range of meanings, derived from the 
Sanskrit word dh~, meaning 'to hold'. The Tibetan equivalent chos literally means 
\:hange' or 'transformation', and refers both to the process of spiritual transforma­
tion and to the transformed result. Ten classical definitions of dharma arc given GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
by Vasuhandhu in his Rational System of Exposition ( Vyakhyayukti), namely: 
phenomenon, path leading to enlightenment, attainment of enlightenment, object of 
consciousness, merit, living thing, scripture, material thing, regulation, and spiritual 
tradition. In terms of the spiritual tradition of Buddhism, the term refers specifically 
to the second of the Three Precious Jewels (Skt. triratna), i.e. to the sacred teachings. 
See Transmission. 
Sakya sa-skya 
One of the four principal schools of Tibetan Buddhism, named after a monastery 
of the same name which was founded by Khon Kmzchok Gyalpo in the eleventh 
century in western Tibet, at a site which has a slightly whitish rock surface. Sakya 
literally means 'pale earth'. The widespread influence of the early Sakya masters 
soon evolved into a whole new school of Tibetan Buddhism, the school reaching its 
full maturity during the time of the Sachen Gongma Nga, the five great founders of 
Sakya, and in partiwlar through the influence of perhaps the greatest of these, 
Sakya Pa~ufita Kzmga Gyaltsen. The essence of the Sakya school's thought and 
practice is enshrined in the sets of instructions called 'the path and its fruit' 
(/am-'bras). 
Sakyamuni Buddha siikya thuh-pa 
Our historical buddha, who is considered to have been the fourth supreme Buddha­
body of Emanation to have appeared during this particular aeon (in which context 
Maitreya is regarded as the fifth or future buddha). The Buddha .Siikyamzmi is 
considered by historians to have lived in the sixth century BC and is credited, 
according to Buddhist tradition, as the progenitor of all the contemporary Buddhist 
lineages relating to the sutras and certain of those related to the tantras, and for 
the establishment of the early Buddhist monastic community. 
Sakyasirpha sakya senge 
An epithet of Sakyamuni Buddha. 
Sal Tree shing sa-/a 
A tall tree ( Vatica Robusta) indigenous to the Indian subcontinent, with wide 
branches and thick foliage. 
Samantabhadra kzm-tu hzang-po 
The male buddha SamantabhaJra is the foremost figure in the assembly of the 
forty-two peaceful deities. It is important to differentiate the male buddha Sanzall­
tahhadra from the male bodhisattva Samantabhadra. See below and Appendix 
Two. 
Samantabhadra (bodhisattva) hyang-sems kun-tu bzang-po 
The male bodhisattva Sanzantabhadra is one of the four outer male bodhisattvas 
among the forty-two peaceful deities. See Appendix Two. 
SAMA Y A rgya rgya rgya 
Certain chapters of the present work end with these words of admonition that the 
seal of commitment (samayanzudra), through which buddha-mind is secured, is to 
be resolutely applied by those who receive the teaching. Sec Seal and Commitment. 
Sarpsara 'khor-ha 
Sec Cyclic Existence. GLOSSARY OF KEY TER~1S 
Santarak~ita zhi-ba'i 'tsho I mkhan-po ho-dhi-sattua 
A monastic preceptor and exponent of Madhyamaka philosophy from Zahor, who 
officiated at the great NJ/andJ Monastic University in India before his arrival in 
Tibet at the invitation of King Trisong Detsen during the eighth century. In Tibet, 
he was responsible together with King Trisong Detsen and Padmasambhava for 
the comtruction of Samye Monastery, the first Buddhist monastery ro be built in 
Tibet. King Trisong Detsen, Padmasambhava and .Santarak~ita jointly established 
Buddhism as the state reli~ion of Tibet. SJntarak~ita is the author of a highly 
influential encyclopaedic work on classical Indian philosophies entitled T,lttt•.J­
sa'?lgrah.J and a short, bur influential, work on 1'vi.Jdhy.1maka known as Orn.Jment 
of the Middle W.1y (Madhy.Jmakai.JI?lkara). 
Seal phyag-rgya, Skr. mudra 
According to the sutras, the word 'seal' denotes a secure realisation of emptiness. 
In the tantras it refers to the various hand-gestures. which accompany the recitation 
of mantras, and by extension refers also to the meditational deity's symbolic hand­
emblem (phyug-mtshun) -the vajra, bell and so forth. In this context therefore 
the seals arc the resonance of buddha-body. furthermore, in the Yogatantras, in 
particular, there are four seals which secure the aspects of mundane consciousness 
(vijii<ina) as their corresponding aspects of pristine cognition (jntlna): among them, 
the great seal (mahJmudrJ) of buddha-body secures the ground-of-all consciousness 
(J/ayauijnLinu) as the mirror-like pristine cognition (adurS.JJiidna); the seal of the 
sacred teachings (dhurmumudrJ) of buddha-speech secures the mental com.ciousness 
(mumwiJIIJna) as the pristine cognition of discernment (fJratyauek~a~zaJII.ina); the 
seal of commitment (samayamudrJ) of buddha-mind secures the deluded conscious­
ness (kli~~amanouij1iJna) as the pristine cognition of sameness (samatJjnJnu); and 
the seal of action (k,mnamudra) of buddha-activity secures the five sensory con­
sciousnesscs (fJaiicuduJravijii.ina) as the pristine cognition of accomplishment 
(kr:tyupasthJnujliJnu). Then, according to Mahayoga, in the perfection stage of 
meditation, when the practices of sexual yoga (s!Jyor-hu) arc applied in order to 
anualise the union of great bliss (mahJsukha) and emptiness, the term 'action seal' 
(karmumudra) denotes an actual sexual partner, while the term 'seal of pristine 
cognition' (f1i,i11amudrJ), by contrast, denotes a mentally visualised consort. For a 
description of the meditative tradition known as MahJmudrJ sec under Great Seal. 
Secret Mantra gsa11g-s11gugs, Skt. guhyamuntra 
See Mantra. 
Seed-syllable yig-"bru, Skt. hijJk~ara 
Generally this refers to Sanskrit syllables or letters visualised as the quintessential 
basis from which arise the forms of meditational deities in the practices of the 
Vehicle of Indestructible Reality. Often these letters or syllables are the first letter 
of the name of the deities themselves, or syllables or letters that are associated with 
specific enlightened families. So, for example, in the case of many of the deities 
belonging to the Vajra family of Ak~ohhya, they are visualised as arising from the 
letter H0~1, while for deities belonging to the Padma family, the letter Al;l is otrcn 
utilised, and so on. 
Self hd,zg·ll}'id, Skt. Jtman 
For an introduction to the concept of 'self' as it applies to our text, sec the lntro­
Judory Commentary by HH the Dalai Lama. See also under Selflessness. GLO..,~ARY Of KEY TERMS 
Self-empowerment rang-dbang, Skt. svadhi~~hana 
A spiritual practice in which the four empowerments are received directly by the 
meditator from a visualised spiritual teacher, as presented in Chapter 2 of the 
present work. See Empowerment. 
Self-identity rang-hzhin, Skt. suabhdva 
This term refers to the inherent existence which the eternalist philosophies of 
Hinduism and Jainism project onto phenomena. Elsewhere, the Sanskrit term atman 
(Tib. bdag), referring to the notion of an independent or substantial self, has also 
sometimes been translated as 'self-identity'. 
Scltlessness bdag-mcd, Skt. nairatmya 
Selflessness in Buddhist philosophy is understood to imply the lack of inherent 
existence both in the personality and in physical and mental phenomena. The 
Lesser Vehicle schools such as Vaibha~ika and SautrJntika expound the doctrine of 
selflessness only in terms of personal identity. They propound that selflessness refers 
to the absence of an independently existing 'self' or 'I', emphasising that the self is 
neither substantial nor self-sufficient. Nowhere among the aggregates of the person, 
either individually, collectively, or even in their continuity can one find a substantial 
or solid being. Material objects are nothing but a series of indivisible atomic 
particles, and consciousness is nothing but a series of indivisible time moments. 
However, the Cittamatra and Madhyamaka schools extend this notion of 
scltlessness to embrace all physical and mental phenomena. All such phenomena 
arc equated with cmptineo;s (sliny,Itli), and these Greater Vehicle philosophical 
schools therefore speak of both the seltlessness of person (pudga/anairJtmya) and 
the selflessness of phenomena (dharmanairJtmya). Nevertheless, substantial philo­
sophical differences exist between the two Greater Vehicle schools in their views on 
\vhat it is that is being negated by the doctrine of emptiness. 
Seminal Point thig-/e, Skt. hmdu 
The Tibetan term tiJig-le conveys a wide range of meanings. It refers to: 1) the pure 
white/male anJ red/female generative essences of the body, which along with the 
energy channels and vital energies flowing through the channels, form an important 
aspect of human physiology according to the tantras and related medical traditions; 
2) a synonym for the Buddha-body of Reality (dharmakaya), known as the 'unique 
seminal point' (thig-le nyug-gcig); and 3) the seminal points of light which appear 
during the All-surpassing Realisation (thod-rga/) practices of the Great Perfection 
(Atiyoga), and also during the intermediate state of reality. See Chapter I I, Part 
One. 
Sense-faculties dhang-po, Skt. indriyu 
See under Sense-organs. 
Sense-organs dbang-po, Skt. indriya 
According to the analysis of abhidhanna, these comprise: the eye (cak~llrindri)'<l), 
the ear (srotrendrry,l), the nose (gbrJ~zcndriy<J), the tongue (jihvendriya), and the 
physical body (kJyendrrya). 
Sensory Activity Fields skye-mched, Skt. ayatana 
The operational fields or contexts in which sensory perception is said to occur. 
Abhidhan11a sources identify twelve sensory activity fields (Skt. d!'JdasJyutuna), six 
of which arc designated as external and the remainder as internal, divided into pairs GLOSSARY Of KEY TERMS 
as follows: the al:Civity field of the eye (cak~urtlyatana) and the activity field of form 
(rzlpayutanu), the activity fields of the ear (srotrayatana) and of sound (sahdJya­
tana), the activity fields of the nose (ghra~zayatana) and of smell (gandhJyatana), 
the activity fields of the congue (jihvayatana) and of taste (rasayatana), the activity 
fields oi the body (kJyJyat.ma) and of couch (spra~~Jyut.ma), and, lastly, the activtty 
fields of the mind (manu Jyatanu) and of mental objects or phenomena (dhar­
mJyatanu). 
Sensory Spectra khums, Skt. dhatu 
A broad term denoting each and every aspect of sensory perception, including the 
sensory subject, object and their interaction. abhidharnra sources identify eighteen 
distinct sensory components or psycho-physical spectra (Skt. a~radas,uihdtll), 
grouped as follows: those of the eye, form and visual consciousness; those of the 
ear, sound, and auditory consciousness, those of the nose, smell, and olfaccory 
consciousness; those of the congue, taste, and gustatory consciousness; those of the 
body, touch, and tactile consciousness; and those of the mind, phenomena, and 
mental consciousness. 
Sentient Being sems-c,ml'gro-ba, Skt. sattval gati 
In a Buddhist context, the expression 'sentient being' has a technical usage which 
contrasts with the concept of a buddha. The term refers to beings in cyclic existence 
and also those who have attained liberation from it but who have nor attained the 
non-abiding niroii~ra of fully manifest buddhahood. The Sanskrit term gati (Tib. 
'gro-ha) literally means 'goer', and sattva, a 'living being'. The Tibetan equivalent 
of the latter, sei11s-can, literally means 'sentient' or 'a being with mind', as it dues 
in English. Sec Six Classes of Sentient/Living Beings. 
Serpentine Water Spirits k/ulklu-mo, Skt. ndgalnJgini 
Male or female water spirits, often depicted as half human and half serpentine, who 
reside in oceans, rivers, lakes and springs, and who are described in Buddhist 
literature as custodians or repositories of submerged spiritual or material treasure. 
1£ is considered important that their environment should be kept pristine and clean; 
otherwise, agitation or pollution can result in the emergence of water spirits that 
engender leprosy, consumption and various skin ailments. 
Seven Emanational Oceans rol-pa ·; r}..')'a-mtsho bdun 
See four Continents and Eight Subcontinents. 
Seven Golden Mountain Ranges gser-gyi ri-bo bdun 
See four Continents and Eight Subcontinents. 
Seven-limbed Practice yan-lag hdun·pa 
A preliminary practice which is normally undertaken as a prelude to the generation 
stage of meditation. The seven limbs together constitute a comprehensive practice 
for purifying negative potentials and accumulating merit, thus laying a stable basis 
for a suc(essful meditational session. The seven limbs in their proper sequence arc: I) 
paying homage through prostration, 2) making offerings, 3) purifying non-virtuous 
habits, 4) rcjoi(ing in the wholesome actions of others and oneself, 5) requesting 
the buddhas to teach, 6) appealing to the buddhas not to enter into niroii~Ja, and 
"')the dedication of merit. Our Chapter 5 includes an additional three. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Se\'en-point Posture of Vairocana m.Jm-swmg chos-hdun 
This is a metaphor for the ideal or recommended meditation posture, in which the 
legs arc crossed in the 'indestructible posture' (vajrJsana), the back straight, the 
hands in the gesture of meditative equipoise, the eyes focused on the tip of the nose, 
the chin slightly tucked in, the lips and teeth set in their natural positions, and the 
tip of the tongue toudung the palate. 
Sexu~Yogashyo~ha 
See under four Delights. 
Signlessness mtshun-ma mcd-fJa, Skt. nirlak~J'!a 
Signlessncss, along with emptiness (Skt. suny.1td) and aspirationlcssness (Skt. nir­
pru~zidhJnJ), is regarded as one of the three approaches to liberation (mam-thar sgo 
gsum) which arc the hallmarks of the teachings on the perfection of discriminative 
awareness (Skt. pruJ'i.lp..ir.JmitJ). Signlessncss is the antithesis of substantialist views 
(mtsh.111- 'dzm) -the perspective that grasps at the inherent existence of things by 
means of their characteristics such as colour~. forms and other properties. 
Single Nature of Mind sems gcig-po 
In Chapter 4 of our text the phrase 'the single nature of mind' is a synonym for the 
ultimate nature of mind (sems-nyid), or the actual reality of mind. 
Six Classes of Sentient/Living Beings 'gru-bu rtgs-drug, Skt. ~uc.fguti 
A birth in cyclic existence is characterised as occuring among one or other of the 
six classes of living bcmgs, depending on the nature and maturity of an individual's 
past actions. The six classes are: 1) gods (dcuu), mundane celestial bemgs whose 
primary mental state is one of pride or exaltation, 2) antigods (asura), who arc 
predominantly host de and jealous, 3) human beings, who are influenced by all 
five dissonant mental states, 4) animals, who arc under the sway of instinct and 
obfuscation, 5) anguished spirits (pretu), who arc under the sway of attachment 
and unsatisfied craving, and 6) the denizens of the hells (nuraka), who arc over­
whelmed by hatred, anger and iear. S111ce all five dissonant mental states have 
influence on human beings, it is not inappropriate to look upon all of these con­
ditions also as extrapolations of human psychological states. In our text the primary 
causes of rebirth in each of these six realms are respectively identified as: pride, 
jealousy, attachment, delusion, miserliness and hatred. Sec also Three World­
systems. 
Six Dissonant Mental States nymz-mongs drug, Skr. ~afklesa 
In certain instances in our text when the context relates to rebirth among the six 
classes of beings, this enumeration does not refer to the well-known abhidhanna 
category of the six primary dissonant mental states: fundamental ignorance, attach­
.ment, aversion, pride, doubt, and dissonam or afflictive views, bur to the six poisons 
_(dug-drug) that are said to generate rebirth among the six classes of living beings, 
namely: pride, jealousy, attachment, delusion, miserliness and hatred. 
Six [Emanational] Sages sprul-sku thuh-drug 
Sec under Six Sages. 
Six Intermediate States har-do drug 
Sec under Intermediate States. 510 GLOSSARY 01' KEY TER!\tS 
Six Kinds of Bone Ornament rus-pa 'i rgyan drug 
The SIX kinds of bone-ornament worn by the wrathful deities, which symbolise the 
tramcendence of Jcarh and dissonant mental states, comprise: necklaces (mgul­
rgyan), bracelets (gdu-bu), earrings (nz,z-cha), crowns (dhu-rgyan), banJolecrs 
(mchod f1hyir-thogs), and human ashes (thai-chen). 
Six Lineages hrgyud-pa drug 
Sec under Lineage. 
Six Mantras and Six Gestures sngags-drug-da11g phyag-rgya drug 
A senes of mantras anJ gestures used for the empowerment of substitutes or 
offerings made to harmful or obstructive forces. This process of consecration is 
effected by means of the following six hand-gestures (phyag-rgya drug) anJ six 
corresponding mantras (sngags-drug): r) The hand-gesture of the expanse of reality 
is conjoined with the mantra 0~ SVABIIAVA SUDDHAI:f SARVA DHARMA~! SVA­
BHAVA SUDDHO 'IIA~1, which purifies the ritual o_bject. 2) The hand-gesture of the 
jewelled casket is conjoined with the mantra NA.\\AI~ SARVA TATHAGATEBHYo 
VISVA MUKHEUIIYAI,I SA RVATIIA KHA~ U [)GATE SPIIARA~:\ IMA~ GAGAN A 
KIIA~t svA!IA, whKh expands the effigy to fill all of space. 3) The hand-gesture of 
swirling nectar is COnJoined with the mantra 0~\ VAJRA AM~TA KU~I?ALI HANA 
IlANA HO~ I'HAT, which transforms the effigy into a vessel filled with nenars. 4) 
The hand-gesture of vast potency is conJoined with the mantra NAMA~! sARVATA­
TIIAGATA AVALOKITE 0~ SAMBIIARA SAMBHARA IIOr-:t, which empowers the 
effigy to grattfy all the senses. 5) The hand-gesture of the comet of knowledge anJ 
bestowal of gifts is COnJOined with the mantra OM JNANA AVALOKITE SAMANTA 
SI'HARA~A RA~MII\IIAVA SAMAYA MAHAMA~I DURU OURU H~DAYA JVALANI 
HO~, which empowers the effigy to fulfil the hopes of all, without contention. 6) 
Lastly, the hand-gesture of the univer!>al monarch is conjomed with the mantra 
NAMAI,I SAMANTA BUDOHANA.~t GRAIIl·.SVARA PRABIIA JYOTFNA MAHASA!\tAYE 
WAliA, whKh ensures that the effigy will pacify, subjugate or transform all inimical 
forces, and bring about a successful outcome for the ritual as a whole. 
Six Perfections pha-rol-tu phym-t"z drug, Skt. ~a!f~tlramitJ 
In the sutra system of the path to buddhahood, the entire bodhisattva's way of life 
or conduct is founded upon the practice of the six perfections which comprise: 
generosity (dJna), ethical discipline (si/a), patience (k~Jnti), perseverance or Joyous 
effort (I·iryu), meditative concentration (dhyJna), and discriminative awarcnc~s 
(/lruJ'IJ). These six arc known as 'perfections' when, for example, the practi(e of 
generosity is: r) motivated by the altruistic intention to auain enlightenment for the 
sake of all beings; 2) undertaken within a sixfold combination of all the perfections; 
and 3) performed with an awareness of the emptiness (;anyatJ) of the agent, the 
act, and the ob)ect in question. As an aspiration, the word pJranutJ is useJ to 
denote a means to perfection; but when describing the perfected result, at the 
attainment of buddhahood, it means 'transcendent perfection', in accord with irs 
literal meaning, 'gone beyond'. 
Six Pri!>tine Cognitions yc-shcs drug 
The six arms of the herukas, among the fifty-eight wrathful deities (see Appendix 
Two), symbolise the six pristine cognitions. These comprise the Pristine Cognition 
of pure cxp<tnse (da~-pa'1 dhyln~s-kyi ye-shcs), in addition to the standard enumer­
.nion of the five pristine cognitions. Sec Pristine Cognition. GLO~~ARY OF KFY TER~IS 51 I 
Six Realms 
See Six Classc~ of Sentient/Living Beings. 
Six Sages sfmtl-sku tlmh-drug 
The six sages are aspens of the Buddha-body of Emanation (nirm.i~zuk.iyu) whi~h 
manifest in the realms of the six classes of living beings, namely: Indrusukra, the 
sage of the gods (lh.;'i thuh-pa dha11g-pu hrgy.;-hyi11), Vem,zcitr.;, the sage of the 
antigods (lha m.;-yin-gyi thuh-p.; th.;g-hzang-ris), Sakyasi1?Jha or Sakyamuni, the 
sage of humans (mi'i th11h-pa shakya seng-ge), Sthirasii!Jhu, the sage of animals 
(hy,zl-smzg thub-fJLl seng-ge rub-hrtan),ju,ilamukhu, the sage of the anguished spirits 
(yt-dt•,zgs-kyi thub-pa kha-'b.zr-ma), ;md Yama Dhamtaraja, the sage of the hells 
(dmyal-ha'z thuh-pa chos-kyi rgyal-po). See Appendix Two. 
Six-syllable Mantra yi-ge drug-fJ.J, Skt. ~·uf.;k~.zra 
The six-syllable mantra (O¥ ~~A~I I'ADME 110~1) is that of Avalokitesvara. 
Sixty \'\'rathful Deities kho-hu drug-cu 
A ~ollenivc name for the assembly of fifty-eight wrathful deities, with the addition 
of the two aspens representing the Buddha-body of Reality: Malwttara Heruka 
and KrodhesL•.zri, who arc respenively the wrathful ~ounrcrparts of Sam.mtabhadra 
and Sam,mt.zhh.zdri. Sec Appendix Two. 
Skilful Means th.zbs, Skt. up.iya 
The con~cpt of skilful means is central to the understanding of the Buddha's 
enlightened deeds, induding his tead1ing of the many scriptures. From a very 
early stage, lluddhisrn developed a hermcneuti~ of reading many of the scriptures 
attributed to the Buddha from thL· perspecttve of skilful means, that is to say from 
the perspective that the truths rL'\'Calcd in a specifi~ tca~hing lll<lY be ~ontingent on 
the needs, interests and mental dtspositions of specifi~ types of individuals. This 
tdea of skilful means, especially in the ~onrext of ading for the welfare of others, 
StKh as through the giving of tea~hings, w3s applied also in relation to the altruisti~ 
deeds of the bodhisattvas. A~wrding to the Greater Vehicle, training in skilful 
means (Skt. 1tfJdyakausalya, Tib. th,zbs-la mkhas-pa) refers to the first five of the six 
perfections: generosity, discipline, patience, perseverance, and mcditati,·e concen­
tration, when integrated with disaiminative awareness, the sixth perfc~tion, to form 
a union of discriminative awareness and means (Skt.{Jr<Zfllopaya). The pcrfedion of 
.. kilful means is also separately enumerated among the ten perfections, where it 
indi..:.ttes the inestimable result a~quired by dedicating the merit of one's virtuous 
deeds, hov.:ever small, for the benefit of all sentient beings in general and for the 
S<lkc of grc<1t unsurp.1ssed enlightenment in parricubr. In the tantras, the technical 
term 'path of skilful mc.111s' (thahs-lam) refers to the pr<Kti~cs in whi~h the internal 
sexual yoga (sbyor-b.z) of the energy channels, ,·ital energies and seminal points is 
refined within the subtle body. Also, the three inner classes of tmrtra a.:~ord111g to 
rhe Nyingma school ..tre sometimes referred to as the 'vehides of overpowering 
f'lte<lns' (tlhzhs dh.zng-bsgyur-ba'i theg-p.z-rn.;ms), in the sense that they ~arry on the 
path all the dissonant mental states which are renoun~ed in the lower paths. 
Sky-farer mk!J,z'-spyod-ma, Skt. khe(uri 
Sec Pure Realm of the Sky-farers. 
Spacious Expanse mkha'-dbyings 
:\ metaphor for the se~ret ~entre of the female deity or female consort. 512 GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Spirit Lords of the Soil sa-bdag, Skt. bhamipati 
According to Sino-Tibetan elemental divination, the spirit lords of the soil are a 
dass of gcomantic forces whose position rotates -in some cases according to the 
years of the sexagenary calendar, and in others according to the months of the year, 
the days of the month, and the hours of the day. It is regarded as important that 
the subterranean locations of the spirit lords should be known at the time of 
constructing a building or ma~u!ala, and before entering into specific activities. 
Spiritual Accomplishment dngos-grub, Skt. siddhi 
See under Accomplishment. 
Spiritual Friend dgc-ba'i bshcs-gsnyenldge-bshes, Skt. kalyanamitra 
The term 'spiritual friend' refers to a spiritual teacher (Skt. guru) who can contribute 
to an individual's progress on the spiritual path to enlightenment and who acts 
wholeheartedly for the welfare of his or her students, adopting a renunciate lifestyle. 
In Tibet, during the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the term became synonymous 
with the great masters of the Kadam school, who combined a scrupulously renunci­
ate lifestyle and deep humility with profound scholarship and meditative resolve. 
In later centuries, the Tibetan abbreviation geshe came to have an academic usage 
in the Gelug school, where it now identifies a scholar-monk with a dm:torate title 
in traJitional BuJdhist stuJies, anJ is similar to the modern usage of the term 
'khenpo' (mkhan-po) in other traJirions. See also under Monastic Preceptor. 
Spiritual Hero Jpa'-bo, Skt. vlra 
A synonym for awareness holder and for 4aka, the male eqivalcnt of the tjakinl. 
Spiritual Sibling mched-grogs/rdo-rje spun-sring 
In the context of the tantras, six types of spiritual sibling are iJentified: 1) universal 
spiritual siblings, i.e. all sentient beings who from beginningless time have been 
one's parents; 2) spiritual siblings who share the Buddhist teachings; 3) harmonious 
spiritual siblings, who arc similar in view and conduct; 4) dear spiritual siblings, 
who share the same spiritual teacher; 5) dose spiritual siblings, who receive teaching 
together; and 6) intimate spiritual siblings, who receive empowerment together. 
Spiritual Teacher bla-ma, Skt. guru 
The original Sanskrit word 'guru' literally means 'heavy' or 'weighty', and by 
extension a 'venerable teacher'. The Tibetan equivalent 'bla-ma' (pronounced /am.1) 
means 'unsurpassed' or 'supreme'. indicating that the guru is unsurpasseJ in terms 
of being the perfect object towarJs which meritorious activity should be directed. 
However, it is important to note that specific qualifications arc necessary in order 
to be considered as a spiritual teacher. These qualifications differ according to the 
level of spiritual practice at which a teacher is adopted. In the context of the tantras, 
the spiritual reacher is said to confer blessings on the meditator, in contrast to the 
mcditational deity, who confers supreme accomplishment and the 4akini, who 
confer enlighteneJ or buddha activities. Ultimately, the guru is one's own buddha 
nature. 
Spontaneous Presence /hun-grub, Skt. anabhoga 
In the esoteric instructional class of the Great Perfection (Atiyoga), the term primor­
Jial purity (ka-dag) refers to the ultimate essence of buddhahood, the Buddha-body 
of Reality, the realisation of whi...:h is approached through the practices of Cutting 
through Resistance (khregs-chod), as described in Chapter 4, and spontaneous G L 0 '>SA I{ Y 0 f KEY T l:.IL\1 S 513 
presence refers to the expressive nature of the Buddha-body of Reality as the 
Buddha-body of Form, the realisation of which is approached through the practices 
of All-surpassing Realisation (thud-rg.JI), as indicated in the emergence of the 
luminosities descnbed in Chapter 1 I. ~tore generally, this term refers to spon­
t.meous or effortless activity, the fifth of the live kmds of buddha activity, according 
to the .\Iahayoga texts. 
Sri Si111ha slm sing-ha 
The name of an early exponent of the Atiyoga teachings, who was a n.Hive of 
SIJOky.mz in Central Asia. 
Srimat dpa/-d,mg /d,m-pa'i ~hing-kh.Jms, Skt. .Srimat 
The southern buddha field of 'The Glorious' is the pure realm presided over by the 
male buddha Ratn.Js.mzbh.m.J. 
Stopa mclwd-rten 
A sacred object representative of buddha-mind. Stzi{hlS were originally a symbol of 
the Buddha-body of Reality, constructed in a dome-shape to hold the remains of 
.Sakyamuni Buddha. The vener<ltion of sttipas is closely connected to the earliest 
phase of the Greater Vehicle in ancient India, where the original stli.{Ja design 
developed within the central monastic assembly hall (Skt. caztyil). The stlipas com­
monly seen in Tibetan cultural areas are constructed to a specific architectural 
design, usually in the shape of a dome, raised on a square base of several layers, 
from which rises a mulrd.1ycred spire. In monasteries and sacred sires, a series of 
eight stup,zs is frequently constructed, symbolising different events in the life of 
.SJkyamuni Buddha. Others are extraordmarily large, like those of lJ.JudhanJth 
.md Suay.mzbhu in ;-.;epa!, or S.Jizchi in India and Boralmdor in Indonesia, and some 
enclose within them entire ma~IC.Jalas of deities, such as the Pe/klmr Chode at 
G)'illltse in Tsang and the Memorial Churte11 in Thmzplm, Bhutan. The symbolism 
of the stzipa is complex, rl'presentmg the progression to buddhahood, the five 
clements, the five pristine cognitions, and so forth. Smaller reliquary stzlpas are 
frequently budt as a funerary mcmonal to important spiritual teachers, often 
enshnning their sacred ashes or embalmed remains. 
Subduer rtsad-du gcod-{hl 
Accordmg to the terminology of the Nyingma school, the six herukas of the 
assembly of fifty-eight wrathful deities are given the title 'subduer', rcternng ru their 
activity of natural tram.formation with respe(t to the di\sonant mental states. See 
Appendix Two. 
Subjugation dbang-gi fils, Skt. l'u~it.JkrzyJ 
See Four Aspects of Enlightened Activity. 
~ublime One 'ph,zgs-p.J, Skt. Jry.z 
A sublime being is one who has entered into a direct realisation of the actual nature 
of reality, in other words the lack of self-identity of both oneself and phenomena. 
The level of experience of an Jrya is stratified in relation to the resultant stage of 
the vehicle being followed. 
Substantialist Views mtshan-'dzin, Skt. lak~a,_zagraha~za 
The mistaken apprehension that the form, colour and other characteristics assumed 
by any particular entity have inherent existence. 5 '4 GLO~SARY OF KlY TERMS 
Subterranean Goddc!>se., /Jrtu1Hnu 
An import.lnt d,t.,s of twelve 111digenous Tibet.ln ~pirits who personify the mighty 
snow r.mges of Tibet and who arc g..1thcrcd within the outer retinue (php-'khor) of 
the fifty-eight wrathful deities. 1-'oremost ..1mong them arc 1\on~tszm Demo (associ­
ated with Mt Num"·huk Huru•a), M,zchen l'umru (assm:i;Hcd with .Mt Amnye 
Machen), Do'fe Chcnchikm,z (as">~.:ratcd with ~lr Everest), Do-'fe Kzmdrakm,l 
(associ.ned with \It ,\iycnchen Tullglh,z), JnJ /)()TJC 1\zmtizung 1a~~oci..1ted with \It 
NoJm Gun~z<~n~). 
Subtle Body phru-bu'z Ius Skt. slik~m,z/.:,iya 
In contrast to our gross phyo;ical body, whiCh is composed of flesh, bones and blood, 
the subtle body comprises a network of subrle energy channels, vital energies ;tnd 
seminal points of energy. This iorm arises as a natural expression of the interaction 
of the subtle mind .md the subtle \'ital energies on which it depends. See the 
Introductory Conll11L'ntary by HH the Dalai L1ma. The most advarKcd level of 
subtle body, known in the tantras a'> the pure illusory body (sgyu-lus), is experienced 
only when <tn indivisible unrty of buddha-body, speech and mind Ius been <1Ctu.1lised 
at the conclusion oi the generation and perfection stages oi medrtation. A similitude 
of such a subrle body can he expenenced dunng the practiCe of dream yoga, 
when the level oi consciousness is relatively subtle and deep, due to the tempor.uy 
cessation of acti"e sensory proce'>scs. The mental body (yiJ-Ius) expcnenced during 
the intermediate state of rebirth is ;tl~o a form of '>Ubtlt: body. 
Suffering sdug-bs11~u/, Skt. Jul!khutd 
In a BuJJhrsr context, the term 'suttcrrng' rs used in a hro.td sense and includes nor 
only phy~rcal 'ens.Hion'> but also mental cxperrences, rlut is to say .111 the essemially 
unsatisfactory expericrKcs oi lrfe 111 cyclic exi .. tence. The various iorms of suffering 
can be caregorrscd rnro thrL·e groups: 1) the suffering of suiiering (dlll!kh,uill~'/.:h,zt,1), 
l) the suiicring of change (l'lfhlril.r,im,zdul!/.:h,ztJ), .1nd _)) the suiiering of pervasive 
conditioning (s.u~r:;.k.ir.zdlll!/.:l',lf,i). The fir..r c.negory rders to .1ll our physical sen­
satiom. and ment<tl e'perierh:es which .uc sdi-evident to us as suffering and towards 
which we have ~pontaneous ieclings of aversron. The second c1tegory includes all 
our experiences wh11.:h are normally recognised as pleas;Hit .1nd Jesrrable, but which 
are noncthcle.,s suiiering in th;H per.,rstent indulgence in these alw<l}'" results rn the 
changed attitude of drssatrsfaction and boredom. It is only through reflection th<H 
the umamfauory nature of such experiem:es C.lll he realised. The third CJtegory 
refers to a basic level of suiferrng which underlies the round of birth, siCkness, old 
age and Je,lth. This suffering serve-; as the cau.,e of our expt·riences oi the two other 
d.1sc;es of sufferrng. It is called pervasive becau~e it extends to Jll forms of lrie in 
cyclic existence, irre.,pective of whether or not liie-forms are endowed with bodily 
existence. Suftering is idcntrtleJ as the tlr•;t of the four noble truths (Skt. c,llurdryasu­
tya), whrch were taught by Sakyamuui Buddha in the course of his first drscourse, 
and the entire path of Buddhism, emhr<Krng .til irs \·chicles (yJnu), m<lY he seen <lS 
the w;tys of elimrn.ltrng suffering, thus bringing an end to cyclic existence itself. 
Sugata Family hdt:-hur gshegs-p,1'z rigs, Skt. sllg,ztaku/,z 
:\synonym tor the Buddha family. See Buddha Family. 
Sukhavati bdc-hu-c.m-gyi zhmg-l.:hums 
ThL· western buddha field oi 'The Blissful' i~ the pure re.tlm presrded over by the 
buddha Amrt.lhh,l. G L 0 S <.,A R Y 0 F KEY T E 101 S 
Supernormal Cognitive Power mngon-shes, Skt. abhiJfza 
Supernormal cognitive power is considered to be a by-product of advanced medi­
tation, but similitudes of these powers are said to arise during the intermediate state 
of rebirth (srid-pa'i bar-du). Six powers are specifically enumerated: clairvoyance 
(lha'i mig-gi mngon-shes, Skt. divyacak~urabhij1ia); clairaudience (lha'i rna-ba'i 
nmgon-shes, Skt. diuyasrotriihhif1iii); knowledge of the minds of others (gzhan-sems 
shes-pa 'i mngun-shes, Skt. paraczttiibhijfzJ); miraculous abilities (rdzu-'phrul-gyi 
shes-pa'i mngon-shes, Skt. ~ddhyabhij1ia); knowledge of past lives (sngon-gnas 
rjes-su drun-pa'i nmgon-shes, Skt. parvaniuasJnusm~tyabhij1ia); and knowledge 
that the flow of all corrupt past actions has ceased (zag-pa zad-pa'i mngon-shes, 
Skt. asravak~ayabhiJfia). Among these, the first five arc said to be mundane powers, 
whereas the sixth is possessed by buddhas alone. 
Supreme Assembly tshogs-chen 
In this context, a synonym for Monastic Community. 
Sutra mdo 
The original discourses which Siikyamuni Buddha taught publicly to his disciples 
as .1 fully ordained monk, consequent to his attainment of buddhahood. In the 
context of the three successive turnings of the wheel of the sacred teachings, the 
Buddha expounded respectively 1) the discourses on the doctrine of the four noble 
truths (Skt. caturJry.ls.ltya), 2) the Perfection of Discriminative Awareness (Prajtiii­
paramitJ), Ratnuku!a and related siitras which emphasise signlessness, aspir­
ationlessness and emptiness, and 3) the Nucleus of the TathJg.1ta (Tathag.ltagurbha) 
and rel,ucd szttrus, as well as the SzUra of the Unrauelling of Enlightened Intention 
(Sandhinirmocanastttra), which emphasise buddha nature and the thorough analysis 
of buddha attributes. Among these the first category is the corpus of the Lesser 
Vehicle szttras and the last two are the Greater Vehicle sutras. The scriptural 
transmissions of the sacred teachings of Buddhism comprise the canonical sutras 
and tantras, as well as the1r commentari.tl literature. 
Sutrayana mdo-sde 'i theg-pa 
A tt·rm referring collectively to the first three of the nine vehicles when contrasted 
with the six vehicles of the tantras. Sec also under Greater Vehicle. 
Symbolic Lineage of Awareness Holders rig-'dzin brda'i brgyud-pa 
The lineage through which non-human and human awareness holders of the highest 
spiritual accomplishments symbolically receive the teachings from bodhisattvas 
of the tenth level. More specifically, this refers to the transmission of advanced 
bodhisattvas such as Muiijusri, Avalokite5vara, and VajrapiitJi who communicated 
with their respective disciples (gods, serpentine water spirits and mountain or sylvan 
spirits) by means of symbolic gestures rather than words. It also refers to rhe 
Jrnode in which the earliest human progenitors of the Atiyoga lineage received and 
-transmitted their highest teachings. 
Tantra rgyud 
The Sanskrit word tantra and irs Tibetan equivalent rgyud literally mean a 'con­
tinuum' or 'unbroken stream' flowing from fundamental ignorance to enlighten­
ment. T ..Intra has two basic meanings in Buddhism -it refers to the continua of 
ground, path and result, and to the literature or tantra texts which expound these 
continua in the context of the classes of tulltra (see below). The former is the G L 0 S SA R Y 0 F K E Y T E R ~~ S 
actual meaning of tu11tru. Through the continuum of the path (/um-gyi rgyud) the 
primordially present continuum of the ground (gzhi'i rgyud) is realised or fully 
manifested as the continuum of the result ( 'bras-bu 'i rgyud). Because tantra includes 
sophisticated techniques which, unlike the sutra path, enable dissonant mental 
states, such as desire/attachment and hatred/aversion, to be transmuted into states 
of realisation, without renunciation or rejection, the practitioner can cultivate an 
uninterrupted continuum between the practitioner's ordinary initial mind, the 
advanced mind on the path, and the resultant fully enlightened mind of the Buddha. 
In the Nyingma school the literature which expounds this dynamic is divided into 
a sixfold classification of the three outer tantras, namely: Kriyatantra, Ubhayatan­
tra, and Yogatantra, and the three inner t,.mtras, namely: Mahayoga, Anuyoga and 
Atiyoga. These six cbsses represent st.tges of ever-decreasing emphasis on external 
ritual and ever-increasing subtlety of internal meditation together with an ever­
increasing subtby of the dissonant mental states, attachment in particular, th.tt can 
be transformed into a blissful experience conjoined with the realisation of the actual 
nature of reality. It is said that on the basis of the fulfilment of the generation and 
perfection stages of the three inner tantras fully manifest buddhahood can be 
attained in a single lifetime. 
Tathagata de-bzhin ~shegs-pa 
A synonym for buddha, used frequently in the sutras, which literally means 'One 
Who Has Thus Gone'. The expression is interpreted in different ways, corresponding 
to the different classes of sutras and tantras, but in general it implies 'one who has 
departed in the wake of the buddhas of the past', or 'one who has manifested the 
supreme enlightenment dependent on the reality that does not abide in the two 
extremes of existence and quiescence'. 
Ten Directions phyo~s-bcu, Skr. das,ldik 
The four cardinal and four intermediate directions, as well as the zenith and nadir. 
Ten Opportunities 'byor-ba bcu 
See Eight Freedoms and Ten Opportunities. 
Ten Similes of Illusory Phenomena shes-bya sgyu-ma'i dpe-bcu 
The ten similes which illustrate the illusory nature of all things are: illusion 
(sgyu-ma), mirage (smig-rgyu), dream (rmi-lam), reflected image (gzugs-bmyatt), a 
celestial city (dri-za'i grong-khyer), echo (brag-ca), reflection of the moon in water 
(chu-zla), bubble of water (chu-bur), optical illusion (mig-yor), and an intangible 
emanation (sprul-pa). 
T erracotta Imprints tslhl-tsha 
Small votive images moulded with clay fashioned in the form of miniature stupus 
or bas-relief meditational deities. They are usually empowered, in the context of 
appropriate rituals, and frequently interred within a larger stupa or kept by devotees 
as an object of veneration. 
Third Empowerment dbang gsum-pa 
The third of the four empowerments. Sec Four Empowerments. 
Thirty-two Major Marks mtshan sum-cu-so-gnyis, Skt. dvatrit~tsamnahapuru­
~·li..Jk~,u.t.J 
See Major and Minor Marks. <.;LO..,~ARY OF KEY TER.\tS 
Those Gone to Bliss bde-b..1r gshegs-pa, Skr. sugata 
An cpHhct of the buddhas. The expre~sion 'those gone to bli~s of the three times' 
(dus-gsum bde-gshcgs) refers to the buddhas of the p;tst, present, and future, exem­
plified respectively by Di/J..I1~zbra, Sakyanumi, and 1\-faitrrya. 
Thread-cross mdos 
In its simplest form a thread-cross can be two crossed stu.:ks or a simple wooden 
frame (nam-mkha') around which coloured threads (rgyang-/m) are arranged in a 
diamond or other more complex pattern. Thread-crosses vary in size and complexity 
depending on the type of ritual fur which they arc constructed. In e~sem:e, they 
represent a 'trap' fur negative and malevolent forces, where the trap symbolises and 
is empowered with all the qualittcs that c.m satisfy the negative or malevolent 
force. Thus, the design uf the thread-cross can clmely mirror that uf a stupa 
or three-dunensional ntd~r4ala and represenr the purity of the psycho-physu.:.tl 
aggregates, elemental properties, and sensory and menral processes, etc. On some 
occasions these complex thread-crosses can be enormous structures up to tens of 
feet high. 
Three Buddha-bodies sku-gsum, Skt. tnkJya 
The Three Buddha-bodies comprise the Buddha-body of Reality, the Buddha-body 
of Perfect Resource, and the Buddha-body of Emanation. Jointly, they form the 
secret object of refuge. See their individual entries, and also under Refuge. 
Three Levels of Existence srid-pa gsum, Skr. trzhhdL'u 
The three levels of extstence are those of celestial, terrestrial and subterranean 
beings. 
Three Lower Existences ngan-snng gsum, Skt. trzdurgati 
Sec Lower Existences. 
Three Poisons dug-gsum 
Attachment, aversion and delusion. See their individual entncs. 
Three Precious Jewels dkon-mchng gsum, Skt. triratna 
The Three Precious Jewels comprise the Buddha (sangs-rgy·as); the sacred teachings 
(Skt. saddh,zrma, Tib. dam-pa'i chus); and the monastic community of monks and 
nuns (Skr. s..J1igha, Tib. dge-'dun). Together these three form the outer obJeCts of 
refuge (sec Chapter I). They are regarded as the perfect obJects in which refuge can 
be sought from the uns.uisfacrory nature of ltfe 111 cyclic existence in general, and 
particularly from the potential suffering of unfavourable future existences. They are 
called 'prectous jewels' because, like the wtsh-fulfilling jewels of Indian classical 
literature, in their met.tphorical sense, they possess the wtsh-fulfilltng capauty to 
provide protection from the peril~ of cyclic existence. See thctr individual entries 
ind also under Refuge. 
Three Roots rtsa-ba gsum, Skt. trmul/,z 
The three roots jointly form the inner object of refuge, according to the tantras (sec 
Chapter 1 ). They comprise the spiritual teacher (Skr. guru, Tib. bla-ma), who 
confers blessing (Skr. adhi~(hJna), the mcditational deity (Skr. l~(adeuutd, Tib. 
yt-dam lha) who confers accomplishments (Skt. siddhi); and the 4akitri (Tib. 
mkha'-'gro) who confer the .tctualtsation of buddha activities (Skr. k~tyakriyJ). See 
their individual enrnes and also under Refuge. sr8 GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Three Times dus-gsum 
The three times are those of past, present, and future. 
Three Vehicles theg-pa gsum, Skt. triyana 
See Vehicle. 
Three World-systems 'jig-rten-gyi khams gsum, Skt. tridhatu 
According to Buddhism, cyclic existence includes three world-systems, namely: the 
world-system of desire (Skt. kamadhatu), the world-system of form (Skt. rupad­
hatu), and the world-system of formlessness (Skt. arapyadhatu). Among them, the 
world-system of desire is a state of existence dominated by sensual experiences, 
particularly the sensations of suffering and pleasure. It is inhabited by all six classes 
of sentient beings, including humans and six categories of gods (kamadeva~a{kula). 
The world-system of form, in which beings have a comparatively subtle level of 
consciousness, temporarily devoid of gross sens~tions of pain and pleasure, is 
regarded as a state beyond ordinary human existence and inhabited only by gods. 
Birth in such a realm requires the attainment of one or all of the four meditative 
concentrations (Skr. caturdhyiina), in past lives. Abhidhanna literature mentions 
twelve ordinary realms of form and five 'pure abodes' (paiicasuddhanivasa), above 
them, where birth can be taken consequent on these four concentrations. Lastly, 
the world-system of formlessness is regarded as the highest level of rebirth within 
cyclic existence and a state where an individual's physical faculties exist only as 
potencies and the individual functions only at the level of consciousness. It is said 
to be inhabited by those who have mastered the four formless meditative absorptions 
(Skt. catursamiipatti). 
Torma-offering !(for-ma, Skr. naivedyalbali 
Tonna-offerings are cakes, usually made of dough and often decorated with colour­
ful butter sculptures. Sometimes they are embodiments of the meditational deities 
associated with particular ritual practices, or they may be food-offerings presented 
to various deities or protectors visualised in the context of meditation. Yet again, 
tormas may act as physical symbols into which diverse aspects of negativity are 
absorbed, transformed, and removed through ritual practices. 
Transcendent Lord bcom-ldan-'das, Skt. bhagavan 
According to the Tibetan interpretation, the Sanskrit honorific term 'bhagavan', 
which has often been translated as 'Blessed Lord', indicates a buddha who has: 1) 
'destroyed' (hcom) the four malevolent/beguiling forces (caturmara) comprising 
the influence of the psycho-physical aggregates (skandha), dissonant mental states 
(klesa), sensual temptations and mundane death; 2) come to 'possess' (/dan) the 
six excellences (~acfgw.za) of lordship, form, glory, fame, pristine cognition and 
perseverance; and 3) 'transcended' ( 'das) the sufferings of cyclic existence. 
Transgressions nyes-by,zs, Skr. du~krta 
The vows maintained by Buddhist monks and nuns include the avoidance of pri1pary 
downfalls (Skt. dpatti) and secondary transgressions. The term transgression (nyes­
byas) is used in a technical sense to refer to a whole host of secondary precepts in 
the context of the monastic vows of individual liberation (pratimok~a), and in the 
wntext of the bodhisattva and tantric vows. The list of these transgressions differs 
according to the context. See Commitment, Pr:ltimok~a and Vows. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Transmission lung, Skt. agama 
The Buddhist sacred teachings (Skt. saddharma) comprise both experiential realis­
ations (adhigama; Tib. rtogs-pa) and authoritative transmissions. The latter include 
both the oral teachings and sacred scriptures (Skt. pravacana, Tib. gsung-rab), 
imparted by the buddhas, as well as the associated commentaries or treatises (Skt. 
sastra, Tih. bstan-bcos), which have been transmitted in an uninterrupted lineage 
or succession from ancient times. In Tibetan Buddhism, it is regarded as essential 
that a transmission of both the text and its oral commentary is formally received 
from an authoritative lineage holder, if any significant spiritual experience is to be 
cultivated, since a mere theoretical understanding of these topics is not regarded as 
sufficient. 
Transmitted Precepts bka'-ma, Skt. pravacana 
from the perspective of the Nyingma school, the scriptures and oral teachings of 
Buddhism have been transmitted in two distinct ways: through the long oral lineage 
of transmitted precepts (ring-brgyud bka'-ma), which have been handed down from 
one generation of accomplished teachers to the next since ancient times, and through 
a close lineage of revealed teaching~ or treasures (nye-brgyud gter-ma), whose origin 
is more recent. 
Treasure-finder gter-ston 
An accomplished master holding an authentic lineage who successfully reveals a 
hidden treasure-text or sacred ohjea, in accordance with the prophesies made by 
Padmasambhava or a specific concealer of treasure-texts. Sec under Treasures. 
Treasures gter-ma, Skt. nidhi 
The Sanskrit nidhi (Tib. gter-ma), translated in English as 'treasure' or 'revealed 
teaching' (gter-chos), refers to those sacred Buddhist texts and objects which were 
concealed in the past in order that they might be protected and revealed in the 
future for the benefit of posterity. The notion of the revelation of concealed texts 
as treasure is extremely ancient in India and China. Within Indian Buddhism, it is 
well known that the Perfection of Discriminative Awareness (Prai1iJparamita) sutras 
were reputedly revealed when Nagarjuua received them in the form of treasure 
from the serpentine water spirits (nJga). A recension of the sadhana class of Maha­
yoga tantras, classified as gter-chos by Nyingma doxographers, is also said to have 
been revealed to eight great masters, including Nagarjuna, in the .Sitavana charnel 
ground near VairJsana. In Tibet, the tradition of the treasures was introduced by 
Padmasambhava and his students, who concealed texts and sacred objects at 
geomanric power-places in the landscape, entrusting them to their respective cus­
todians or treasure-lords (gter-bdag) or to 4akinf for safe keeping, with the predic­
tion that these would be discovered at some future time by a prophesied 
treasure-finder (gter-ston). Accordingly, it is believed that the students of Padma­
Jambhava have continued to emanate in the form of treasure-finders in successive 
.centuries in order to reveal these treasure-teachings. Other kinds of treasure­
teachings revealed directly from the enlightened intention of buddha-mind in a 
telepathic manner (dgongs-gter), or in a pure visionary experience (dag-snang), arc 
also recognised. There are many such lineages extant today, including that of the 
present text, and they arc maintained mostly, but by no means exclusively, by the 
Nyingma school. 5 20 GLO~SARY OF KEY TER:VtS 
Treatise bstun-hcos, Skt. Stlslr<~ 
The term treatise (sdstru) in the Buddh1st context generally refers to authoritative 
works written by accomplished masters elucidating the profound meaning of the 
Buddha's scriptures ({Jrur·ucuna). Treari,es are contrasted with scriptures (both 
sutras and tantras), the latter being attnbured to the Buddha. See Kangyur and 
Tengyur. 
Trichiliocosm stong-I{Siml 'J1g-rten-gy1 kh.1ms, Skt. trisahusr,llokadh.itu 
See Chiliocosm. 
Trisong Detsen khri-srong ldc'u btsan 
The th1rty-e1ghth king of Tihet and son of Klllg Trule Tsuktcn. Despite his accession 
to the throne at a tender age and the opposition of ministers who were Bon 
sympathisers he established Buddhism as the state religion of Tibet. He invited both 
Santtlrak~ita and Padmastlmbhavtl to construct Tibet's first monastery at Samye 
and to transmit the diverse Indian lineages of the .vinaya, sutras and tantras. He 
became a realised practitioner of the tantras in his own right, under the guidance 
of Padmasambhava, and actively sponsored the education and projects of his highly 
organised tramlat1on teams. Accord1ng to tradnional accounts, it was Kmg Tnsong 
Detsen who requested J't.Zdmasambhava to give the teaching<; that are presented in 
our text. See Gyurmc Doqe's 'Brief Literary History'. 
Tulku sprul-sku, Skt. mrm,z~I.Jk.iyu 
In its philosophical and d,tssical US<tge the term refers to the Buddha-body of 
Emanation. However, based on this concept of emanation, a different usage 
developed in Tiber following the inception of a tradition to formally recognise the 
incarnations of high spiritu,tl teachers after their death. The first such tulku to be 
given formal recognition was Karma Puksln, the second, Karmupa ( r 204-8 3 ). 
Later, other important tulku institutions emerged, such as that of the Dtllai Lama 
and Punchen L.amu, and the system of recognising successive generations of tulkus 
became commonly cstabli~hed throughout T1bet and the Himalayan reg1on. 
Turning of the Wheel of the [Sacred] Teachings chos-kyi 'khor-lo bskor-ba, Skt. 
dhur111tl(tlkr.Jpra~·urlu11u 
This metaphor refers to the promulg.ltion of the Buddhist teachings by the 
Buddha and cominues to he used metaphorically with regard to the teaching activity 
of successive lineage holders. The Buddha S..ikyam1mi is recognised to have promul­
gated three sequential 'turnings of the wheel'. The as~ociat1on with the concept of 
a wheel derives from a comparison w1th the 'wheel of sh.Hp weapons' said to he 
held in the hand of a universal monarch. Within the context of this comparison 
the sacred teachin~s are composed of ethical discipline (the central axis), analytic 
discriminative awareness (the sharp spokes) and meditative concentration (the stJ­
bilismg perimeter). Sec also Sutra. 
Tu~ita dga'-/d,m 
Tu~1tu is the name of the fourth of the six god re,tlms, which are said to be located 
within the world-system of desire (Skt. kamadhtitu). It is regarded as the current 
abode of the future buddha Maitreya. 
Twcl\'e Links of Dependent Origination rtcn-'brei bco-K11)'1S, Skt. du,zdJsJnga­
fJr,ltityus,/mu lfhiJ,, 
See undn Dependent Origination. GLOSSARY OF KEY TER:vtS 521 
Twenty-four Power-places yul nyi-shu rtsa-bzhi, Skt. caturvi1?t5atmahasthana 
The twenty-four power-places are the following regions of the ancient Indian sub­
continent, which are associated with the tantras of the CakraSJ'!fl.!tlra and Heruka 
classes: }J/andhara, Ocjqiyana, Paun.wgiri, KJmarapa, Malava, Sindhu, Nagara, 
Munmuni, Karw.tyapd!aka, Devfko!a, Karmarapti(aka, Kulatil, Arbuda, Godavari, 
Hmtt.idrl, llankela, Lampt.ika, Kaiicl, Saurd~!ra, Kaliliga, Koka~za, Caritra, Kosala, 
and Vindhyakaumt.irapaurika. 
Two Accumulations tshogs-gnyis, Skt. sambharadvaya 
See under Accumulations. 
Two Extremes mtha' gnyis, Skt. .. mtaduaya 
The two extremes of eternalism and nihilism. See under Eternalist and Nihilist. 
Two Truths bden-pu gnyis, Skt. saty,zduaya 
All Buddhist philosophical schools of thought formulate their ontology within the 
framework of the two truths, the conventional or relative truth (Skt. samu~tisatyu, 
Tib. kun-rdzob bden-pa) and the ultimate truth (Skt. paramarthasatya, Tib. don­
dum hden-pa). However, the definition of the two truths differs according to their 
different epistemological interpretations. The Cittamatra and Madlryamaka, the 
two Greater Vehicle schools of thought which emphasise the doctrine of the two 
truths, define the ultimate truth as a synonym of emptiness, the ultimate nature of 
phenomena, while the conventional truth is defined as the empirical aspect of reality 
as conventionally experienced through our perceptions. Such an aspect of reality is 
true only within the relative framework of our own veridical experiences. However, 
according to the various tu11tra vehicles there are increasing degrees of subtlety in 
the interpretation of the two truths. 
Ubhayatantra gnyis-ka 'i rgyud 
Ubhayatantra, also known as Carydtantra, is the second of the three outer classes 
of tantra, which form one sub-category of the six classes of tantra, and the fifth of 
the nine vehicles, according to the Nyi11gma school of Tibetan Buddhism. Ubhaya­
tantra places an equal emphasis on both external ritual and internal meditation. 
Ultimate Truth don-dam bden-pa, Skt. paramdrthasatya 
Sec under Two Truths. 
Unique Seminal Point thig-le nyag-gcig 
According to Atiyoga, this expression is a synonym for the Buddha-body of Reality. 
For the range of meanings conveyed by the Tibetan term thig-le, sec Seminal Point. 
Universal Monarch khor-lo bsgyur-ba, Skt. cakrauartin 
In the context of Indo-T1betan Buddhism, the concept of the benign universal 
monarch or emperor who rules in accordance with the law of the sacred teachings 
of Buddhism is one that has permeated Buddhist literature since the time of Asoka. 
Their appearance in the world is considered a unique and rare event, just as the 
appearance of a buddha is considered ro be unique and rare. 
Unsurpassed Yogatantra bla-med rgyud, Skt. Yoganiruttaratantra 
The highest among the four classes of tantra, the other three being: Kriya, Caryd, 
and Yoga tantra. The differences between the four classes of ta11tra represent 
stages of ever-decreasing emphasis on external ritual and ever-increasing subtlety 
of internal meditation. Niruttara means 'unsurpassed' or 'highest' and it is in 522 GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
the Yoganiruttara tantras that the meditative techniques for realising the Three 
buddha-bodies are the most subtle and refined. There are two distinct phases in the 
dissemination of the Unsurpassed Yogatantras in Tibet, which are reflected in two 
differing ways of classifying them. According to the Nyingma school, the earlier 
phase of dissemination, they are classified into Mahayoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga, 
whereas the later schools classify them into Father, Mother and Non-dual or 
Indivisible tantras. 
U~l]i~avijaya gtsug-gtor rnam-rgyal-ma 
One of the three principal meditational deities associated with longevity practices 
and the subject of five principal dharatJi incarnations, U~tJisavijaya generally 
assumes a slightly wrathful appearance, with three faces (white, yellow and pale 
blue) and eight arms holding diverse symbolic implements. She is seated with her 
legs folded, in the indestructible posture. 
Vai4uryaprabharaja sang-rgyas sman-bla 
The Buddha of Medicine, the principal figure in the Buddhist medical tantras, 
who is regarded as the progenitor of the Four Tantras of Medicine (rGyud-bzhi). 
According to certain sources Sakyamuni Buddha is believed to have assumed a 
specific form when teaching the medical tantras and that aspect of the Buddha is 
called Vai4uryaprabharaja, the 'King of Blue Beryl Light'. He is normally depicted 
in paintings as being blue in colour anJ holding in his left palm an alms bowl filled 
with the fruits of a medicinal plant, chebulic myrobalan. According to the lineage 
of the medical tmttras, there are eight different aspects of the Medicine Buddha, of 
which Vai4uryaprabharaja is the foremost. 
Vajra rdo-rje 
In the sense of rdo-rje pha-lam (pronounced 'dorje phalam'), this term means the 
diamond, literally 'the sovereign among all stones'. In Buddhism however rdo-rje 
indicates the indestructible reality of buddhahood, which is defined as both imper­
ishable (mi-gshigs) and indivisible (ma-phyed). The emblem symbolic of this inde­
structible reality is also known as rdo-rje or vajra. This is a sceptre-like tantric ritual 
object which is held in the right palm usually whenever playing a ritual bell. The 
sceptre symbolises skilful means anJ the bell discriminative awareness. Holding 
these together in the two palms represents the perfect union of discriminative 
awareness and skilful means. Vajrii, also known as Pingala (dmar-mo), is the name 
given to the first of the six yogin£ from the south, a subcategory of the twenty-eight 
lsvarf. See Appendix Two. 
Vajra-brothers and sisters rdo-rje ming-sring 
The most intimate of spiritual siblings (mched-grogs), with whom one shares 
empowerments and commitments. See Spiritual Sibling. 
Vajra Family rdo-rje'i rigs, Skt. vajrakula 
One of the five enlightened families (paiicakula) into which the meditational deities 
of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource are subdivided. The deities of the Vajra 
family include the peaceful buddhas Ak~obhya- Vajrasattva and Buddhalocana-a'nd 
the corresponding wrathful aspects Vajra Heruka and Vajrakrodhe5vari. See Appen­
dix Two. 
Vajra-master rdo-rje slob-dpon, Skt. vajriiciirya 
The 'master of inJestructible reality' who presides over empowerment ceremonies GLOSSARY 0 I' KEY TER~1S 523 
and the related ritual darKes of the great means for attainment (Skt. muhJsadhana, 
Tib. sgrub-chen), embodying the central meditational deity of the ma~uJala. 
Vajradhara rdo-rje 'chang 
V.1jradhara (lit. 'vajra-holder') is an expression of the Buddha-body of Reality, 
spontaneously arising from the pure, pristine expanse of inner radiance, in a form 
complete with all the characteristi~.:s of the Buddha-body of Perfect Resource. Vajra­
dhara is thus regarded as the root of all the five enlightened families and conse­
quently he is also known as the lord of the sixth enlightened family. Many tantra 
texts and lineages attribute their origin directly to the Buddha-body of Reality -
represented in the form of either Samantabhadra or Vajradhara. Other tantra texts 
and lineages dairn th..1t Va,r.Jdhara is a form assumed by Sakyamuni Buddha when 
giving esoteric teachings on tantra. Vajradhara is said to become manifest when 
one has totally overcome all dualisti~.: conceptions and actualised buddhahood. He 
is usually depicted as seated and holding a vajra and bell in his crossed palms. 
Vajrakila rdo-rje plmr-ba 
One of the eight foremost meditational deities a~.:cording to the 'means for auain­
mcnt' class of Muluiyoga. \'a,rakila is dark blue in colour with three faces and six 
arms, the central pair of hands holding a ritual dagger (Skt. kilu). Often the lower 
part of his body is also visualised in the form of a ritual dagger, the three facets of 
the pyrJmid..1l blade representing the transformation of delusion, attachment and 
aversion. Va,rakila is representative of the natural expression of buddha activity. 
Vajrakumara rdu-r1e gzhon-nu 
An aspe~.:t of the meditational deity Vajrakila. Sec under Vajrakila. 
Vajrapar:ti phyag-na rdo-rje 
The emhodiment of the spiritual power (hala) and skilful means of all the buddhas 
as visualised in the form of a meditational deity. V.Jjrap.i'!i is generally depicted as 
being wrathful in aspect, holding a vajra in his right upraised hand and a skull-cup 
in his left. In peaceful form Vajrap.11Ji is also one of the eight male bodhisattvas 
among the forty-two peaceful deities. See Appendix Two. 
Vajrasattva rdo-rje scms-dp.1' 
Vajras.Jttua, or in literal translation 'the spiritual hero of indestructible reality', has 
two principal forms. Firstly, in the ~.:ontext of the Guhyagarbha tantra, and related 
texts, he is identified with the peaceful male buddha Ak~ubhya- Vajrasattua. Sec 
Appendix Two. Secondly, in the context of the preliminary practices (sngon-'gro) 
of meditation, the recitation of Vajrasattua's Hundred-syllable Mantra (yig-brgya) 
purifies negativitics, obscurations, transgressions, and downfalls (see Chapter I). In 
this latter context, Vajrasatt~·a is visualised as white in colour, dressed in the silken 
garments and ornaments of a bodhisattva, and holding a vajra in his right palm 
close to the heart and a bell in his left hand close to the left side of his hip. Sometimes, 
both forms of Vajrasattua arc integrated in a single practice, as in Chapter 5 of the 
present work, where practitioners first visualise the white form of Vajrasattua, 
hefore visual ising the forty-two peaceful deities, including Ak~obhya- Va1rasattua, 
Within their hearts. As a lineage holder, Vajrasattua is credited with the transmission 
of Atiyoga into the human world, appearing in the form of the deva Adhicitta 
(/h.Jg-scms-cun) before Prahevajra (dga'-rab rdo-rje) in a vision. According to the 524 GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Gn:at Perfection, V,ztrus,zttua is sometimes used synonymously to Indicate the 
Buddha-body of Reality, and as such is identical to Samantabhadra. 
Vajrayo'lna rdo-rje'z theg-pa 
See Vehicle of lndeo;tructible Reality. 
Vehicle theg-pa, Skt. yana 
The term 'vehicle' suggests a dynamic momentum leading to the attainment of 
t~irod~Ja. Although from one standpoint thnc may be as many veh1clcs as there are 
thoughts aris1ng in the mind, the sacred teachings are classified into distinct vehicles 
accordmg to their power. Accordingly, the expression 'two vehicles' refers to the 
d1stinct1on between the Lesser Vehicle and the Greater Vehicle, the expression 'three 
vehicles' or 'three c;tusal ,·chicles' refers to the veh1cles of pious attendants, hermit 
buddhas and bodhisattvas. The division into 'nine vehicles', which corresponds to 
the Nyingma das~ificauon, includes the three causal vehicles of the pious attendants, 
hermit buddhas and bodhisattt•as, and the six resultant vehicles of Kriyata11tra, 
Ubhay,ztalltra, Yogata11tra, Maluiyoga, A11uyoga (rjcs-su nz.zl-'byor-gyz theg-p,z), 
and Atiyoga (shin-lu m,z/. 'hyor-gyi thcg·fhl). 
Vehicle of Indestructible Reality rdo-rte'i theg-p,z, Skt. V.w.zyana 
The Vehicle of Indestructible Reality comprises, in the Nyi11gma classification, 
the six result.1nt vehicles of the tmrtras, so-c.1lled because the indcstrw.:tihle and 
1mperish.1ble realities of buddha-body, speech and mind are fully re<tlised and 
manlicstcd when the continuum of the ground is transformed into the continuum 
of the result by means of the continuum of the path. See under Tantra. It is also 
known as the Veh11.:le of Secret M.zntr,zs (Skt. Guhy.mz,mtr.zy,ilz.J) because engaging 
in this path ensures the protection of the mind from dualistic pen.:ept10ns and 
conceptions. See Mantra. 
Vidyadhara rig-'dzin 
Sec under Awareness Holder. 
Vinaya 'dul-ha 
The Sansknt term t•in.zya, literally meaning 'discipline', refers to the monastic 
discipl111e maintained by members of the Buddhist community, including the ethical 
codes which regulate the life of fully ordained monks and nuns, as well as prob.:ttion­
:Hy nuns, nov1ce monks and nuns, and male and female laity. The collection of 
.5akyamuni Buddha's discourses which elucidate and define the principles of these 
ethical codes (including the administrative guidelines for running a mon.tstery) is 
known as the t•in,zy,JfJi~,zka, which is one of the three primary collections of dis­
courses cornpnsing the Buddhist caiwn (Skt. trifJi~.zkJ). Based on different interpret­
ations relating to the subtler points of the Buddha's discourses on L'lll.l)'•l, there 
emerged, in ancient India, several distinct schools, including the Sthal'irauJda, 
SaruJstu·,idu, MalhiSLIIiglnka and S,mzmitiy.z. The r•in.zya tradition which hec.tme 
prcdommant in T1bet is that of the SarL'dstu·<idins. Sec Vows and Pratimok~a. 
Virtuous Action dge-lhl, Skt. kusala 
Both virtue .111d its oppo~ite, non-virtue (Skt. akusa/a, Tih. nu-dgc·h.z) are defined 
111 terms of hoth motiv.Hion and the consequences of the al'tlon. In ordl'r for an 
Ktion to be ddineJ as either virtuous or non-virtuous, there are certain prerequisite 
icatures wh1ch must he present. These are: mom·ation, the actual execution of the GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
act, and the conclusion. An act is non-virtuous if it is: 1) motivated by negative 
intentions; 2) committed by the agent in a sane mind and with full knowledge; 
and 3) the person derives a sense of satisfaction from having accomplished the act. 
Such actions can be physical, verbal, or mental. Broadly speaking, non-virtuous 
actions are categorised into the following ten types: killing, stealing, and sexual 
misconduct (which are the three physical actions); lying, divisive speech, harsh 
speech, and meaningless gossip (which are the four verbal actions); and covetous­
ness, harmful intent, and distorted views (which are the three mental actions). An 
act is considered virtuous if it either passively refrains from the ten recognised types 
of non-virtuous action, or actively engages in acts for the sake of others with an 
altruistic motivation. 
Visionary Appearances snang-ba 
According to the terminology of the Great Perfection, there are four successive 
visionary appearances experienced through the practice of All-surpassing Realis­
ation (thod-rgal). These arc: the visionary appearance of the direct perception of 
reality (chos-nyid mngon-sum-gyi snang-ba), the visionary appearance of mcreasing 
contemplative experience (nyams gong-'phel-ba 'i snang-ba), the visionary appear­
ance of reaching the limit of awareness (rig-pa tshad-phebs-kyi sna11g-ba), and the 
visionary appearance of the cessation of clinging to reality (chos-nyid-du 'dzin-p,; 
zad-pa'i snang-ba). 
Vital Energy rlung, Skt. uayu 
In the tantras and related medical traditions, it is said that there are ten kinds of 
vital energy or subtle winds which flow through the 72,000 energy channels (Skt. 
nJ4i) of the body. These sustain life and include the energies which support various 
conceptual states within the individual's mind. At the subtlest level, subtle mind 
and vital energy are thought of as a single entity. The ten kinds of vital energy 
comprise: five inner viral energies (nmrg-gi rlung lnga) which influence the body's 
inner motility, and five outer vital energieS (phyi-'i rlung lnga) which have specific 
effects on the outward motility of the body. The former are the viral energies 
associated with the five elements (earth, water, fire, wind, space) and their respective 
colour-tones (yellow, white, red, green, blue). The latter comprise life-breath (Skt. 
pr.i7Ja, Tib. srog-'dzin), muscular movement (Skt. vyana), digestion (Skt. samana), 
semiotidvocal movement (Skt. udana), and reproduction/waste disposal (Skt. 
apana). The movement of viral energy through the energy channels of the subtle 
body is refined in the context of the perfection stage of meditation. Ordinarily, in 
the case of individuals who have not cultivated such practices, both viral energy 
and subtle mind are d1ffused via the right and left energy channels and thereby come 
to permeate the entire network of the body's minor channels. This dissipated vital 
energy is known as the vital energy of past actions (las-kyi rlung) because it is 
activated by dissonant mental states, and the influence of past actions predominates, 
obscuring the inner radiance of the subtle mind. However, when the practices of 
the perfection stage of meditation are applied, the knots which block their combined 
movement through the energy centres (Skt. cakra) located on the central energy 
channel are untied and both vital energy and subtle mind enter, abide and dissolve 
within the central energy channel of the body (Skt. avadhuti) and then the non­
conceptual inner radiance arises, for which reason it becomes known as the vital 
energy of pristine cognition (ye-shes-kyi rlung). On a physical level, it is important, 526 G L 0 S S A R Y 0 F K E Y T E R :\f S 
according ro the T1beran med~~.:al tradition, rhar viral energy remains in balance 
with bile and phlegm, which arc collectively known as the three humours, if sound 
health is ru be maintained. 
Vows [of Buddhism! sdom-pa, Skr. Su'?w.lra 
Sets of precepts or injunctions voluntarily adopted in the course of Buddhist practice 
which facilitate an individual's progress on rhe path to enlightenment. These include 
short-term vows, such as the one-day vows, lifelong vows, such as the monastic 
vows of a fully ord,lincd monk or nun, and perpetual vows associated with the 
Greater Vehicle, which are to be maintained over a succession of lifetimes. All 
such vows may be subsumed within three categories: the monastic vows of the 
pratimok~a, the special vows of the bodhisattvas, and the special commitments 
(Skt. samuyu) undertaken by practitioners of the tantras. See Priitimok~a and 
Commitment. The special vows of the bodhisattvas, exemplified by the SzUra of 
AkJsaKurbha, extol that bodhisattvas must be careful to maintain their altruistic 
vows, expressed in the verses of the four immeasurable aspirations, and to avoid 
nineteen specifically enumerated root downfalls (Skt. ma/,ip,ztti) and forty-six trans­
gressions (Skt. du~k~t,z). In all schools of Tibetan BuJJhism, the pratimok~a and 
bodhisattva vows and the commitments of the tantras art: fully integrated. 
Vows of the Buddhist Laity dge-bsnyen-g)•i sdom-pa 
Sec under Pratimok~a. 
Water Libation chu-gtor 
A specific purificatory offering of water, the ritt·s of which were introduceJ w Tiber 
from lndi.1 by Atisa during rhe eleventh century. 
Way of Secret Mantras gsang-sngagsfkyi thcg-pa], Skr. Gulryamantrayr.ina 
The 'way of secret mantras' is a synonym for the Vehicle of Indestructible Reality 
(Skt. VajrayJn<l). 
Wind rlzmg, Skr. vdyu 
See Vital Energy. 
World-system "1ig-rten-gyi khams, Skr. lokadhatu 
See Three World-systems. 
Wrath Jr,zg-po 'i las, Skr. mara~z.zkriyii 
One of the four aspects of enlightened activity. The concept of wrath in the context 
of BudJhist tantra should not be unJersrood in terms of even the subtlest egocentric 
violence or fierceness. Wrath here refers to the natural transformative process of 
buddha-mind, the a~gressivc natural transformation of the deep-seated condnioning 
which unJcrlies mundane deluded consciousness and the concomitant psycho­
physical aggregates, elemental properties, and sensory and mental processes. Sec 
Four Aspects of Enlightened Activity and Appendix Two. 
Wrathful Deities khro-bo 'i llhz-tshogs 
Sec Appendix Two. 
Yak~a gnod-sbyin 
/\class of spirit~ of Indian origin who .1ssume both male (yak~,z) and female (yak~i,_zi) 
forms. Frequently depi.:red as holding choppers, cleavers, .md swords, they are said 
to inhabit mountainous areas and sylvan groves, and if propitiated in the context GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
of a means for attainment (Skr. sadhana), they may confer the common accomplish­
ment of swift-fooredness. The Tibetan equivalent gnod-sbyin literally means 'grant­
ing harm', emphasising their more malign attributes. 
Yam a gshin-rje 
Sec under Yama Dharmaraja. 
Yama Dhannaraja gshin-rje chos-kyi rgyal-po 
The emhodimenr of the forces of impermanence and the infalliole laws of cause and 
effect. His fierce form is iconographically depicted holding the wheel of life's rebirth 
processes (bhavacakra, Tib. srid-pa'i 'khor-lo) within his jaws, indicating that the 
nature of cyclic existence is in its entirety bound by impermanence and the laws of 
cause and effect. In the context of the intermediate state of rebirth (srid-pa'i bar-do) 
he personifies the process of confronting in death the nature of one's past life's 
actions and, based on the natural laws of cause and effect, he personifies the process 
of 'judgement' that determines the consequential outcome of such past actions. See 
Chapters I I and 13 and the Introduction. Yama Dharmaraja is also the sixth of 
the six sages (tlmb-pa drug), who form one subcategory within the assembly of the 
forty-two peaceful deities. Sec Appendix Two. 
Yeshe Tsogyal ye-shes mtsho-rgyal 
Padmasambhava's innermost Tibetan consort who became accomplished in the 
ma~uJala of Vajrakila. She compiled many of Padmasambhava's oral teachings and 
concealed them throughout Tibet in the form of treasures (gter-ma) to be discovered 
by later generations. 
Yoga rna/-'byor 
The Sanskrit word yoga, literally meaning 'union', is interpreted in Tibetan to mean 
'union with the fundamental nature of reality'. In Buddhism, therefore, yoga refers 
to the methods through which the meditator unites with the qualities of the medi­
tational deity in the context of the generation stage, and the nature of fundamental 
reality during the perfection stage, of meditation. In terms of the latter, it includes 
mental and physical practices, which refine the energy channels, and mature control 
of the vital energies and seminal points within the subtle body. These practices 
cultivate discriminative awareness, and the coalescence of emptiness respectively 
with the four delights, with inner radiance, and with non-conceptualisation. 
Yogatantra mal-'hyor-gi rgyud 
The third of the three outer classes of tantra, which form one subcategory of the 
six classes of tantra, and the sixth of the nine vehicles, according to the Nyingma 
school of Tibetan Buddhism. Yogat.mtra emphasises meditation, rather than exter­
nal ritual, and here, the meditator progressively refines an identification with the 
meditational deity. 
Yogic Exercises khrul-'khor, Skt. )•antra 
A series of vigorous exercises, including yogic jumps ( 'bebs), performed in conjunc­
tion with specific visualisations and breathing techniques, which enable the medi­
t.ltor to develop the physical flexibility necessary for the suotle meditative practices 
of the perfection stage of meditation. 
Yogic Jumps 'behs 
Sec under Yogic Exercises. GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS 
Yogin rna/-'byor-pa 
According to the Tibetan definition, a yogin is defined as 'one who seeks to unite 
with the fundamental nature of reality'. In other words, a yogin is one who inten­
sively follows the spiritual paths outlined in the generation and perfection stages of 
meditation, as well as the Great Perfection. 
Yogini rna/-'byor-ma 
A female yogin. In the context of the present work, the term most frequently refers 
to the twenty-eight Isvarf who form one sub-category of the fifty-eight wrathful 
deities. See Appendix Two. Thematic Index by Chapter 
Chapter One 
Natural Liberation of the 
Nature of Mind: The Four­
session Yoga of the 
Preliminary Practice 8-22 
COMMON PRELIMINARY 
PRACTICE 8-I I 
Meditation on the Four Themes that 
Turn the Mind Toward the Search 
for Liberation 8-I I 
UNCOMMON PRELIMINARY 
PRACTICE 11-21 
Refuge I I-I 3 
Outer Refuge I I-I 2 
Inner Refuge 1 2-I 3 
Secret Refuge I 3 
Generation of an Altruistic 
Intention I4-15 
Recitation of the Hundred-syllable 
Mantra of Vajrasarrva 15-I6 
The :V1ary4ala Offering 17-I 8 
Prayer to the Lineage Teachers 19-20 
Receiving the Four 
Empowerments 2.0-21 
Chapter Two 
A Prayer for Union with the 
Spiritual Teacher, [entitled] 
Natural Liberation, 
Without Renunciation of 
the Three Poisons 2.6-8 
PRAYER FOR UNION 26-7 
With the Buddha-body of Reality 26 With the Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource 26 
With the Buddha-body of 
Emanation 27 
With the Three Buddha-bodies in 
Union 27 
ASPIRATIONAL WISHES 27-8 
Chapter Three 
Root Verses of the Six 
Intermediate States 32-4 
Intermediate State of Living 3 2 
Intermediate State of Dreams 32 
Intermediate State of Meditative 
Concentration 3 3 
Intermediate State of the Time of 
Death 33 
Intermediate State of Reality 3 3 
Intermediate State of Rebirth 
33-4 
Chapter Four 
The Introduction to Aware­
ness: Natural Liberation 
through Naked 
Perception 38-57 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE 
INTRODUCTION TO 
AWARENESS 38-9 
THE ACTUAL INTRODUCTION TO 
AWARENESS 39-42 
Synonyms for Mind 4 I 
The Three Considerations 41-2 
CONSEQUENCES OF THE 530 
INTRODUCTION TO 
AWARENESS 42-4 
OBSERVATIONS RELATED TO 
EXAMINING THE NATURE OF 
MIND 44-6 
INTRINSIC AWARENESS AS VIEW, 
MEDITATION, CONDUCT, AND 
RESULT 46-50 
Four Grear Media 46-7 
Four Grear Nails 4 7 
Unity of the Three Times 47-8 
Exhaustion of the Six Extreme 
Perspectives 48-50 
SYNONYMS FOR 
A W A R EN E S S 50-5 3 
THE NATURE OF 
APPEARANCES 53-5 
CONCLUSION 56-7 
Chapter Five 
The Spiritual Practice entitled 
Natural Liberation of 
Habitual Tendencies 62-91 
THE TEN-BRANCHED PRAYER FOR 
THE ACCUMULATION OF 
MERIT 62-5 
Branl:h of Taking Refuge 63 
Branch of Invitation 63 
Branch of Requesting the Deities to be 
Seared 63 
Branch of Paying Homage 63 
Branch of Making Offerings 64 
Branch of the Confession of 
Negativity 64 
Branch of Sympathetic Rejoicing 64 
Branch of Turning the Wheel of the 
Sacred Teachings 64 
Branch of Requesting the Buddhas Not 
to Enter Nirvana 6 5 
Branch of the Dedi~ation of Merit to 
the Unsurpassed Greater 
Vehicle 65 
PURifiCATION 65-6 
Visualisation of Vajrasattva 65-6 
Recitation of the Hundred-syllable 
Mantra of Vajrasattva 66 
MAIN PRACTICE 66-90 T H E ~1 AT 1 C I :-.; D EX B Y C H A PTE R 
Visualisation, Prostration, Offerings, 
Refuge and Prayer to the Pea..:eful 
Deities 66-7 5 
Samantabhadra and 
Samantabhadri 67 
Vairocana and Dhatvist•ari 67-8 
Vairasattva and BuddhalocLZnJ, 
encircled by K~itigarbha, 
Maitreya, Lasya and 
Pu~pa 68-9 
Ratnasambhava and Mamaki, 
encircled by Samantabhadra, 
Akasagarbha, ;\1Jiya and 
Dhupa 69-70 
Amitabha and PdtJtfarat•iisini, 
encircled by Avalokitesvara, 
Man;usrl, Gitd and Aloka 70 
Amoghasiddhi mzd Samayatdrii, 
encircled by 
Sarvanivaranaviskambhin, 
va;ra1,a,_zi, candha and 
Nartl 71 
Eight Male and female 
Gatekeepers 7 1-2 
Six Sages 7 2-4 
Forty-two Assembled Pe,lcefitl 
Deities 74-5 
Visualisation, Prostration, Offerings, 
Refuge and Prayer to the Assembly 
of Awareness Holders 75-S 
Visualisation, Prostration, Offerings, 
Refuge and Prayer to the Twelve 
Principal Wrathful Deities 78-81 
Mahottara Heruka and 
Krodhesuari 7H-9 
Buddha J-leruka and 
Buddhakrodhe5uari 79 
VaJra Heruka and 
va,rakrodhesvari 79 
Ratna J-leruka and 
Ratnakrodhesuari 79-80 
Padma J-leruka and 
Padmakrodhesvari So 
Karma J-leruka and 
Karmakrodhe5varf So 
Visualisation, Prostration, Offerings, 
Refuge and Prayer to the 
Peripheral Wrathful Deities 81-7 
Eight Matara~ 81-2 T II E !\1 A Tl C I N D EX BY C H A PTE R 
Ezght Pisaci 82-4 
Four Female Gatekeepers 84 
Twenty-eight lsvari 8 5-7 
Prayer to the Assembly of Sixty 
Wrathful Deities 87-9 
Aspirational Prayers 89--90 
CONCLUSION 90-9I 
Chapter Six 
Natural Liberation of 
Negativity and Obscuration 
through [Enactment of] the 
Hundredfold Homage to 
the Sacred Enlightened 
Families 96-1 I2 
llomage to Samantabhadra and 
Samantabhadri 96-7 
Homage to the Five Peaceful Male 
Buddhas 97-8 
Homage to the Five Peaceful Female 
Buddhas 98 
Homage to the Eight Male 
Bodhisattvas 98-9 
Homage to the Eight Female 
Bodhisatrvas 99-IOI 
Homage to the Four Male 
Gatekeepers IOI-2 
Homage to the Four Female 
Gatekeepers I 02 
Homage to the Six Sages 102-3 
Homage to the Six Herukas Io3-4 
Homage to the Six Krodhesvari 104-5 
Homage to the Eight Matara~ 105-6 
Homage to the Eight Pisaci Io6-7 
Homage ro the Four Female 
Gatekeepers I07-8 
Homage to the Eight 
Projectresses Io8-9 
Homage to the Twenty-eight 
isvari IIO-I2 
Chapter Seven 
Natural Liberation through 
Acts of Confession II6-5o 
PRELIMINARIES II7-I9 
Invitation and Request for the Confessional Field to be 
Present I 17 531 
Homage to the Three Buddha-bodies 
which Compose the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities I 17 
Threefold Offering of Outer 
Phenomena, Inner Cloud-masses, 
and Secret Substances 1 I 7 
Secret Offering of Supreme Bliss I I 8 
Affirmation of Vows within the 
Modality of the View I I 8 
Call to the Assembly of Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities for 
Attention I I8-I 9 
CONFESSION IN THE PRESENCE 
OF THE INEXPRESSIBLE 
TRUTH I 19-23 
CONFESSION IN THE PRESENCE 
OF THE PEACEFUL 
DEITIES 123-30 
To Samantabhadra and 
Samantabhadri I 23 
To the Five Male Buddhas 123-4 
To the Five Female Buddhas I 24 
To the Eight Male Bodhisattvas I 24 
To the Eight Female 
Bodhisattvas I24-5 
To the Six Sages I 25 
To the Four Male Gatekeepers I 25 
To the Four Female 
Gatekeepers 125-6 
To the Entire Array of the Peaceful 
Deities I 26-9 
Further Remorseful Confession to the 
Peaceful Deities I 29-30 
CONFESSION IN THE PRESENCE Of 
THE WRATHFUL 
DE I Tl E S I 3 0-3 8 
Confession of Faults in Achieving 
Meditative Stability in 
Reality qo-31 
Confession of Faults in Achieving the 
Meditative Stability which 
Illuminates All That Appears I 3 r 
Confession of Faults in Achieving the 
Meditative Stability of the Causal 
Basis I 3 I 
Confession to the Five Herukas I 3 I-2 532 
To the Five Krodhesvari 1 3 2 
To the Eight Matarary 13 2 
To the Eight Pisaci 13 2 
To the four Female Gatekeepers 133 
To the Twenty-eight lsvari 133 
To the Awareness Holders 1)3 
Confession of One's Beginningless 
Violation of the 
Commitments 133-4 
Confession to the Entire Ma~:t~ala of 
Wrathful Deities and the Request 
for Forgiveness 134 
Specific Confessional Prayers to the 
Ma~:t<;lala of the Wrathful 
Deities 135-8 
PLAINTIVE CONFESSION OF 
RAMPANT EGOHOOD 138-42 
CONFESSION IN THE I'RESENCE 
OF TilE VIEW 143-7 
CONFESSION IN TilE I'RESENCE 
OF ALL THOSE GONE TO 
BLISS 147-50 
Confession of Degenerated 
Commitments and 
Infractions 14 7-50 
Recitation of the Hundred-syllable 
Mantra of Vajrasattva 150 
Chapter Eight 
Natural Liberation through 
Recognition of the Visual 
Indications and Signs of 
Death rss-Br 
INTRODUCTION 155-6 
EXTERNAL SIGNS Of DEATH 156-9 
INTERNAL SIGNS OF 
DEATH 159-62 
Examination of the Vital 
Breath 1 59-60 
Examination of the Signs of Death 
which Occur in Dreams 160-62 
SECRET SIGNS OF DEATH 162-4 
SIGNS Of REMOTE DEATH 164-8 
Analysis of the Reflected Image in the 
Sky 164-8 
SIGNS Of NEAR DEATH 168-71 THEMATIC INDEX BY CHAPTER 
MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS OF 
DEATH 171-3 
SIGNS OF EXTREMELY NEAR 
DEATH 173-7 
Dissolution of the Five Sense Faculties 
and the Five Elements 17 3-5 
Movement of the Generative 
Essences 175-6 
Dawning of Inner Radiance 176-7 
SIGNS INDICATING THE PLACE OF 
SUBSEQUENT REBIRTH 177-80 
CONCLUSION 180-81 
Chapter Nine 
Natural Liberation of Fear 
through the Ritual 
Deception of Death 186-95 
GENERAL CONSOLIDATED RITE 
FOR AVERTING DEATH 186-9 
SPECIFIC RITES FOR AVERTING 
DEATH 189-94 
Ritual Averting of the Signs of Ncar 
Death 189-91 
Ritual Averting of the Signs of Remote 
Death 191-3 
Ritual Averring of Further Signs of 
Near Death 193-4 
CONCLUSION 194-5 
Chapter Ten 
Consciousness Transference: 
Natural Liberation through 
Recollection 200-216 
INTRODUCTION 200-201 
TRAINING IN CONSCIOUSNESS 
TRANSFERENCE 201-5 
ACTUAL API'LICATION OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS TRANS­
FERENCE AT TilE TIME Of 
D EAT H 20 5-I 5 
The Timing and Context 205-8 
Consciousness Transference into 
the Buddha-body of 
Reality 208-9 
Consciousness Transference into the TIIE!\tATIC INDEX BY CHAPTER 
Buddha-body of Perfect 
Resource 209-1 1 
Consciousness Transference mto the 
Buddha-body of 
Emanation 2 I I -1 2 
Instantaneous Consciousness 
Transference 21 2-14 
Consciousness Transference of 
Ordinary Beings 214-15 
CONCLUSIOS 216 
Chapter Eleven 
The Great Liberation by 
Hearing 225-303 
PART ONE: AN ELUCIDATION OF 
TilE INTERMEDIATE STATE OF 
THE TIME OF DEATH AND OF 
THE APPEARANCE OF TilE 
PEACEFUL DEITIES IN THE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE Of 
REALITY 225-54 
INTRODUCTION 225-6 
INTRODUCTION TO INNER 
RADIANCE IN THE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE OF THE 
Tl~tE OF DEATH 227-34 
Introduction to the Inner Radiance of 
the Ground 22 7-3 2 
Introduction to the Inner Radiance of 
the Path 23 2-4 
INTRODUCTION TO THE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE Of 
REALITY 234-54 
lnrroduction to the Arising of Sounds, 
LightsandRays 235-6 
Appearance of the Peaceful 
Deities 236-54 
Whzte Vazrocana and 
Akasadhatvist·ari appear within 
Blue Luminosity 236-8 
Blue Ak~obhya- Vajrasattva and 
BuddhalocanJ appear within 
White Luminosity, Encircled by 
Four Bodhisattvas K~itigarbha, 
A1aitreya, Lasya and 
Pu~pJ 238-9 
Yellow Ratnasambhava and A1amaki 533 
appear within Y dlow 
Luminosity, Encircled by Four 
Bodhisattvas Akasagarbha, 
Samantabhadra, Malyd and 
Dhupa 239-41 
Red Amitabha and Pa~zcjaraudszni 
appear withzn Red Luminoszty, 
Enczrcled by Four Bodlnsattuas 
Avalokttesvara, MariJusri, Gitd 
and Atoka 24 1-3 
Green Amoghasiddhz and 
.SamayatJrii appear within Green 
Luminosity, Enczrcled by Four 
Bodhisattvas Va,rapJ~i. 
Nivara~zavi~khambhin, Gandha 
and Narti 243-6 
Emire Peaceful Assembly of the hve 
Enlightened Families Appears 
Together with the Vision of the 
Four Pristine Cognitions 
Combined 246-51 
Divine Assembly of Awareness 
Holders and Qakinis appears 
withm Five-coloured 
Luminosity 2 51-4 
PART TWO: AN ELUCIDATION OF 
TilE APPEARANCE OF THE 
WRATHFUL DEITIES IN THE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE OF 
REA Ll T Y 2 55 -70 
Introduction 25 5-8 
Arising of the lntermedi.ne State of the 
Wrathful Deities 258-66 
Buddha Hemka and 
Buddhakrodhesuari 2 5 8-9 
Vajra Heruka and 
Vajrakrodhesuarl 259-60 
Ratna Heruka and 
Ratnakrodhesvari 260-6 I 
Padma Hemka and 
Padmakrodhesvarl 261-2. 
Karma Heruka and 
Karmakrodhesvar/ 26 2.-3 
The Eight Gauri, the 1-:ight Pisdci, the 
Four Female Gatekeepers, and 
the Twenty-eight lsuarf 2.()3-6 
Consequences of Recognition and Lack 
of Recognition 2()6-8 534 
Aspirational Prayers 268-70 
CONCLUSION OF THE 
INTRODUCTION TO THE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE OF THE 
TIME OF DEATH AND THE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE OF 
REALITY 270-72 
PART THREE: AN ELUCIDATION OF 
THE INTERMEDIATE STATE OF 
REBIRTH 273-300 
INTRODUCTION TO THE MENTAL 
BODY 273-85 
Characteristics of the Mental 
Body 274-6 
Characteristics of the Intermediate State 
of Rebirth 276-9 
The Meeting with Yama Dharmar<lja, 
Embodiment of the Infallible Laws 
of Cause and Effect 279-81 
The Power of Perceptions 282-4 
Prayer to Mahakaru~ika 284 
OBSTRUCTION OF THE WOMB 
ENTRANCES 285-93 
CHOOSING A WOMB 
ENTRANCE 293-300 
Transferring the Consciousness to Pure 
Buddha Fields 297-8 
Choosing a Womb Entrance within 
Impure Cyclic Existence 298-300 
CONCLUSION 300-303 
Chapter Twelve 
Aspirational Prayers 308-16 
Aspirational Prayer Calling to the 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas for 
Assistance 308-9 
Aspirational Prayer which Rescues 
from the Dangerous Pathways of 
the Intermediate States 31 o-13 
Aspirational Prayer which Protects 
from Fear of the Intermediate 
States 314-16 
Chapter Thirteen 
A Masked Drama of 
Rebirth 320-41 
PART ONE: NATURAL LIBERATION THEMATIC INDEX BY CHAPTER 
OF THE INTERMEDIATE STATE 
OF REBIRTH: A TEACHING 
REVEALING THE NATURAL 
EXPRESSION OF VIRTUE AND 
NEGATIVITY IN TilE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE OF 
REBIRTH 320-34 
THE SCENE 320-21 
Act One: The Meeting of the 
Wrongdoing One Lak~an<lraka 
with Yama Dharmaraja 322-9 
Act Two: The Meeting of the Virtuous 
Householder Srijata with Yama 
Dharmaraja 329-33 
PART TWO: SUPPLEMENT TO A 
TEACHING REVEALING THE 
NATURAL EXPRESSION OF 
VIRTUE AND NEGATIVITY IN 
THE INTERMEDIATE STATE OF 
REBIRTH, ENTITLED GONG OF 
DIVINE MELODY 335-41 
THE SCENE 335 
Act One: Exhortation by the Deity of 
Good Conscience following the 
Entry into the Hells of the 
Wrongdoing One 
Lak~anaraka 336-39 
Act Two: Celebratory Speech by the 
Deity of Good Conscience as the 
Virtuous Householder SrTjata sets 
off for the Realms of Higher 
Rebirth 339-41 
Chapter Fourteen 
Liberation by Wearing: Natural 
Liberation of the Psycho­
physical Aggregates 347-79 
INTRODUCTION 347-8 
PART ONE 
Twenty-six Line Supreme Essential 
Mantra of Samantabhadra 348 
Twenty-nine Line Supreme Essential 
Mantra of Samantabhadri 348-9 
Twenty-five Mantras which Reverse 
Attachment 349-54 
PART TWO: SEED-SYLLABLES AND 
MANTRAS OF THE PEACE-THEMATIC INDEX BY CHAPTER 
FUL AND WRATHFUL 
DEITIES 354-74 
Forty-two Peaceful Deities 3 54 
Five Male and Five Female 
Buddhas 3 55-7 
Eight Male Bodhisattvas 3 57-8 
Eight Female Bodhisattvas 3 59-60 
Six Sages 360-61 
Eight Male and Female 
Gatekeepers 3 61-3 
Sixty Wrathful Deities 364 
Twelve Principal Herukas and 
Krodhc5v~ri 365-7 
Eight MiHara}_l 368-9 
Eight Pisaci 3 69-70 
Four Female Gatekeepers 3 70-7 1 Twenty-eight lsvari 3 7 1-2 
Four Great Wrathful Male 
Gatekeepers 373-4 
PART THREE 
Six Syllables of the Six Classes of 
Sentient Beings 3 7 4-5 
Hundred-syllable Mantra of 
Vajrasattva 375 
Syllables of the Sixteen Vowels 
and Thirty-four Consonants 
375-6 
Heart Mantra of Dependent 
Origination 3 76 
Mantras of the Four Aspects of 
Enlightened Activity 3 76-7 
CONCLUSION 377-9 535 1. The assembly of the 
Forty-two Peaceful Deities 
(zhi-ba 'i lha-tshogs). 2. (above) The male and 
female primordial buddh• 
Samanrabhandra and 
Samanrabhadri in union. 
(below) Peaceful Deities o: 
the Buddha family: the m• 
buddha Vairocana, in um 
wirh rhe female buddha 
AkiisadhiitviSvari. 3· Peaceful Deities of the 
Vajra Family: (centre) the 
male buddha Ak~obhya­
Vajrasatrva, in union 
with the female buddha 
Buddhalocana; (left) the male 
bodhisattva K~itigarbha; 
(right) the male bodhisattva 
Maitreya; (top) the female 
bodhisattva Pu~pa; (bottom) 
the female bodhisattva Liisyii. 4· Peaceful Deities 
of the Ratna Family: 
(centre) the male buddha 
Ramasambhava, in union 
with the female buddha 
Mamakl; (left) the male 
bodhisattva Samantabhadra; 
(right) the male bodhisattva 
Akasagarbha; (top) the 
female bodhisattva Dhiipii; 
(bottom) the female 
bodhisattva Pu~pii. 5· Peaceful Deities of the 
Padma Family: (centre) the 
male buddha Amitabha, 
111 union with the female 
buddha Piindaraviisinl; 
(left) the male bodhisatt va 
Avalokitdvara; (right) 
the male bodhisarrva 
Man j usrik umii rabhuta; 
(top) the female bodhisattva 
Alokii; (bottom) the female 
bodh1sarrva Gita. 6. Peaceful Deities of the 
Karma Family: (centre) the 
male buddha Amoghasiddhi, 
in union with the female 
buddha Samayatiirii; (left) 
the male bodhisattva 
Niviiranav iskambhin; 
(right) the male bodhisattva 
Vajrapiini; (top) the female 
bodhisarrva Narri; (bottom) 
rhe female bodhisattva 
Gandhii. -.The Six Sages: 
(lop left) InJrasakra; 
(top riRht) Siikyamuni; 
!centre left) Vcmacirra; 
(centre right) Srhirasi1~1ha; 
tbottomlefi) .Jvalamukha; 
(l)()/10111 right) Ya ma 
I>hannar aja. 8. The Eight Gatekeepers: 
(top left) Yamantak a in 
union with Pasa; (top 
right) Hayagriva in union 
with Sphota; (bottom left) 
Trailokyavijaya in union 
with Ankusa; (bottom right) 
Amrtakut:tc!alin in union with 
Ghan~a. 9· The Assembly of Fifty­
eight Wrathful Deities 
(khro-bo'i lha-tshogs ). 10. The male and female 
primordial buddhas 
Mahottra Heruka and 
Krodhesvari in union. 1 '. Wrathful Deities of the 
Buddha Family: Buddha 
Heruka in union with 
Buddhakrodhe svari. 12. Wrathful Deities of 
the Vajra Family: (top) 
Vajra Heruka in union 
with Vajrakrodhesvari; 
(centre) the six yogini of the 
east: Manuriik~asi, Brahmiini, 
Raudri, Vaisl).iivi, Kaumiiri, 
and IndriiJ?i; (bottom) 
the wrathful gatekeeper 
Vajratejasi, alongside the 
yogini gatekeeper Vajrii 
[Mahaka li]. 13. Wrathful Deities of 
the Ratna Family: (top) 
the wrathful gatekeeper 
Vajnimogha, alongside the 
yogin! gatekeeper Vajra 
IMahachagala]; (centre) 
Ratna Heruka in union with Ratnakrodhesvarl; (bottom) 
the six yogin! of the south: 
Vajra, Santi, Am~ta, Sauml, 
Oan9i and Rak~asl. r4. Wrathful Deities of 
the Padma Family: (top) 
the wrathful gatekeeper 
Vajraloka, alongside the 
yogin! gatekeeper Vajra 
[Mahakumbhakarnl); 
(centre) Padma 
Heruka in union with 
Padmakrodbesvari; (bottom) 
the six yogini of the west: Bhak~asi, Rati, Rudhiramadi, 
Ekacarini, Manoharika, and 
Siddhikari . · Wrathful Deities of 
-~Karma Family: (top) 
.;:rma Heruka in union 
:h Karmakrodhe5vari; 
. •1tre) the six yogini of the 
rrh: Yayudevi, Agnayi, 
1rahi, Cimundi, Bhujana, 
-d Varuniin i; (bottom) 
-~wrathful gatekeeper 
3Jravetall, alongside the 
gini gatekeeper Vajra 
-Jmbodara]. 16. Clusters of the Eight 
Miitarah and the Eight 
Pisac1: (top left) the four 
Pisiici of the cardinal 
directions: Simhamukhi, 
Vyaghrlmukhi, S~galamukhi , 
and Sviinamukhi; (bottom 
left) the four Matara~ of 
the cardinal directions: 
Gauri, Caurl, Pramoha, and 
Vet:ili; (top right) the four 
Pisaci of the intermediate 
directions: Grdhramukhi, 
Kankamukhi, Kakamukhl 
and Ulukamukhi; (bottom 
right) the four Miitarah of 
the intermediate directions: 
Pukkasi, Ghasmari, Candali 
and Smasani. · · 